Department of Health
Statement of Strategy 2021-2023
February 2021
Contents
Overview of the Department of Health’s Statement of Strategy 2021-2023
Foreword by the Minister
Introduction by the Secretary General
Scope, Purpose and Use of our Statement of Strategy
Strategic Priorities
Strategic Priority 1: Manage COVID-19 and promote public health
Strategic Priority 2: Expand and integrate care in the community
Strategic Priority 3: Make access to healthcare fairer and faster
Strategic Priority 4: Improve oversight and partnership in the sector 16 Strategic Priority 5: Become an organisation fit for the future
Delivering our Strategy
Developing our Internal Environment
Responding to our External Environment
Conclusion
Appendices:
I. How the Department of Health developed its Statement of Strategy
II. Programme for Government Commitments
III. List of National Strategies
IV. Bodies under the Aegis of the Department of Health
Overview of the Department of Health’s Statement of Strategy 2021-2023
Vision
The Department’s vision for the people of Ireland A healthier Ireland, with improved health and wellbeing for all, and with the right care delivered in the right place at the right time
Mission
Functions
Why the Department exists
How the Department fulfils its mission
Enduring Goals
To improve the health and wellbeing of people in Ireland by: – supporting people to lead healthy and independent lives; – ensuring the delivery of high quality and safe health and social care; – creating a more responsive, integrated and people-centred health and social care service; and – promoting effective and efficient management of the health and social care service and ensuring best value from health system resources.
Strategic Priorities
What the Department will prioritise between 2021-2023
Manage COVID-19 and promote public health
Expand and integrate care in the community
Make access to healthcare fairer and faster
Improve oversight and partnership in the sector
Become an organisation fit for the future
Our Values
How the Department works
Engaging with the public and service users
Respect and fair and equal treatment of all
Collaboration, innovation and forward thinking
Professionalism, leadership and accountability
Integrity, impartiality and value for money
Our Enablers
Supporting the Department to achieve its strategic priorities Empowered teams and cross-functional working
Data, technology and digitisation
Funding, structures and infrastructure
Innovation
Stakeholder collaboration and alignment
Foreword by the Minister
This Strategy is published at a defining moment for Ireland.
Confronted with unprecedented challenges in the form of a pandemic, the Department of Health, the HSE and all partners in the health sector, the Government more broadly and the Irish public have all risen to meet the challenge.
We will continue to lead the COVID-19 public health response and to support the resilience and future preparedness of health and social care services. We will also build on the innovation, agility and transformation displayed in the response to date to the Covid-19 emergency and will continue to advance the Sláintecare vision.
The Government sets out an ambitious agenda in the Programme for Government and is making progress to deliver this through an unprecedented investment in health and social care services.
This investment will meet specific demands of the Covid-19 response, the broader care needs of the Irish public, and importantly will fund the ambitious Sláintecare transformation agenda.
This reform programme, benefiting from such strong political consensus, will help to ensure sustainable health and social care in Ireland.
I am intent on advancing towards universal healthcare in the years ahead.
Through all of our efforts in the health and social care sector, we will ensure that the public and service users see concrete, tangible improvements in their access to services, their experiences and their outcomes.
The public and service users will be engaged at the heart of the work that we do.
Strengthening the strategic capabilities of the Department and sharpening its strategic focus will help to ensure that we deliver across the ambitious health agenda set out in the Programme for Government, which includes:
Delivery of Care in a COVID-19 Environment Implementing Sláintecare
Promoting Women’s Health
A Healthier Future
Mental Health
A Health-led Approach to Drugs Misuse An Age-friendly Ireland
Disability
Climate Action.
I look forward to working with Ministers of State Rabbitte, Butler and Feighan, colleagues in the Department and partners in the wider health and social care sector as we improve Irish health and social care over the coming three years.
Introduction by the Secretary General
Since the onset in February 2020 of COVID-19, colleagues in the Department of Health have shown what public service means.
The organisational values described in this Statement of Strategy are lived and on display every day in Miesian Plaza and with those working from home – leadership, professionalism, integrity, accountability, innovation.
Most of all there is a shared, deep and abiding commitment to serving and delivering for the public and to supporting the Minister, Ministers of State and the Government.
This Statement of Strategy was prepared in consultation with the public, our stakeholders, our agencies, other Government departments and staff at the Department of Health.
The Strategy responds to the commitments set out in the Programme for Government and is informed by an environmental analysis, which will also influence how we go about delivering our Strategy.
The Statement of Strategy identifies a clear and select set of strategic priorities for the Department, aligned with the Programme for Government priorities and the Sláintecare long-term vision for health and social care.
Over the coming three years, we will build on our work of recent years and deliver on the vision of universal healthcare set out in Sláintecare.
We are guided by the three pillars of the Health Service Capacity Review 2018: promoting healthier lives and preventing illness (and continuing in the near term with public health protection); expanding integrated care in the community; and reforming acute hospital care.
Advancing these priorities will involve strengthening our capabilities as a Department to deliver on our core functions, as we become an organisation fit for the future, with enhanced oversight capacity, and enhanced capacity to manage risk and engage in continuous learning.
The exercise of developing and implementing this Strategy is thus an exercise in becoming a more strategic Department; a more capable Department; and a more open Department, engaging with our partners and stakeholders to listen and to encourage alignment.
The Department will also need to be the right size to continue to deliver its mandate effectively.
The response to COVID-19 has demonstrated the Department’s strong leadership of the health and social care sector, and how effectively we can collaborate across government.
We intend to continue to play a leading role in advancing important cross-government work, including on the COVID-19 public health response, the Healthy Ireland agenda to address the wider determinants of health, mental health policy, climate action, and equality and human rights.
Our mandate and our work in the Department of Health is broad, varied and profoundly important.
Over the past year the Department’s work has been more in the spotlight than ever before.
I am proud of the work colleagues in the Department have done in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.
I would like to thank colleagues in the Department and across the health and social care system for your diligence and commitment.
Together we can look forward to implementing this Strategy to make a real difference to the public and to service users throughout Ireland.
Scope, Purpose and Use of our Statement of Strategy
About the document
This Statement of Strategy sets out the direction for the Department of Health’s work for the next three years.
The development of the Strategy has taken into account the wider context within which the Department of Health operates and is mindful of the important role played by the various partners and stakeholders that contribute towards our shared vision.
Informed by our current environment, this Strategy focuses on our specific role and distinct contribution to improving the health and wellbeing of the people of Ireland and our role in ensuring that health and social care services are delivered to those who need them.
Further details about the process used to develop this Statement of Strategy are available in Appendix I.
The scope of the statement of strategy This is a Statement of Strategy for the Department of Health; it does not seek to set out a strategy for the entire health sector.
It is the Department’s corporate strategy for the next three years.
It focuses on the breadth of work that the Department delivers, within its role and function.
All of the work of the Department of Health is carried out in service of our vision, mission and commitment to the people of Ireland.
All of the broader work of the Department of Health is represented in our published strategies, policies and is detailed through our annual business planning process.
It aligns with the commitments set out in the Programme for Government and the Sláintecare fundamental principles (figure 1).
In the context of this work, there are five strategic priorities that will provide a focus to advance our mission in the next three years.
This Strategy is written in a time of high uncertainty; therefore it is a living document which will be reviewed regularly during the period 2021-2023 to ensure it continues to be useful in directing our work and responding to changes in the environment.
Components of the strategy
The Strategy outlines our: vision: the Department’s long-term vision for the health and wellbeing of all the people of Ireland; mission: our purpose as a Department and the contribution we seek to make; strategic priorities: priority areas that the Department will focus on for 2021-2023; initiatives: the initiatives likely to have the most impact in advancing the strategic priorities over the next three years; enablers: the supports that will make it possible to implement this strategy; values: the deeply ingrained principles that guide all our actions; and performance: metrics that will be used to assess our success in fulfilling our Strategy.
The breadth of our work
The Department of Health has more than 600 employees working together across multiple units and divisions to deliver on a very broad mission and mandate.
Further information about who we are is available online at: www.gov.ie/health and https:// whodoeswhat.gov.ie/root/health/
The function of the Department of Health is to serve the public and support the Minister for Health, Ministers of State, and the Government: by providing leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes; by undertaking governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high-quality services; by collaborating to achieve health priorities and contribute to wider social and economic goals; and by creating an organisational environment where high performance is achieved, collaborative working is valued, and the knowledge and skills of staff are developed.
The Department adheres to the Corporate Governance Standard for the Civil Service.
The Department’s Corporate Governance framework focuses on its legal, regulatory, policy and service obligations and on the sets of relationships between the Minister, Ministers of State, Secretary General, the Management Board, senior management, all staff and stakeholders in determining the direction and performance of the organisation.
More information is available: gov.ie/health The Department undertakes a broad range of work in accordance with our functions.
We are a relatively small Department with significant responsibility and accountability for the expenditure of one of the consistently largest budgets among government departments.
Our work encompasses: leadership of the delivery of the COVID-19 response; policy development and driving reform based on the vision and principles laid out in Sláintecare.
This includes policy development and reform across: public health, health and wellbeing, primary and community care, social care, mental health, women’s health, acute hospital services, eligibility, and e-health and health information; governance and oversight of bodies under our aegis including the Health Service Executive; responsibility for regulatory policy, including the regulation of certain health professionals, service providers, private health insurance, medicines; leadership in patient safety policy and legislation through the National Patient Safety Office; professional leadership through our Chief Medical Officer and Chief Nursing Officer; strategic workforce planning and development and managing industrial relations at national level; investment in capital infrastructure; ensuring accountability, including through the management of a significant volume of parliamentary work, public correspondence, and media queries; delivery of a significant programme of legislation;
providing support for the Department’s core functions through expertise in finance, legal, HR, data protection, research, statistics and analytics, policy development, audit, programme management, bioethics; and delivery of civil service, cross-governmental and international commitments.
There are 19 bodies under the aegis of the Department of Health, including one commercial State body.
These are listed in Appendix IV.
The largest of our agencies is the Health Service Executive which is responsible for providing public health and social care services to everyone in Ireland.
More information on the HSE, including its corporate plan, is available at https://www.hse.ie/eng/ These bodies and agencies, together with a wide range of other stakeholders, fulfil their roles in delivering health and social care services to the people of Ireland.
This statement of strategy will guide our work
This Strategy is informed by the Programme for Government, the Sláintecare report and fundamental principles, extensive consultation and the current multifaceted environment.
The Department of Health operates within a complex system of determinants of health and wellbeing, working alongside, and in partnership with, a wide range of service providers and stakeholders and other Government Departments to deliver our mission.
Our environment is increasingly complex and rapidly changing.
As we have seen with the COVID-19 pandemic and response, it can present sudden threats requiring rapid diversion of attention and resources. This Statement of Strategy has been compiled amid much uncertainty.
An analysis of our external environment has informed the approach of this Strategy and its five strategic priorities, and will inform how we advance and deliver this Strategy.
Within the next three years it is clear that the Department will need to be agile, building our capacity to plan for uncertainty, be strategic and remain responsive to our environment.
The Statement of Strategy is owned by all of the staff of the Department of Health and will be used to guide our work.
It is the framework we will use over the next three years to strengthen our strategic focus as a Department and to measure our progress.
It will also be used as the foundation for guiding our engagement with our agencies, partners and stakeholders.
Specific processes will be put in place to ensure the delivery of the Strategy and these are outlined in the following sections.
Strategic Priorities
Over the next three years, the Department of Health will continue to deliver across the broad portfolio of our work to fulfil our core functions.
In the context of our wider work, a number of strategic priorities have been selected to bring focus to our collective work over the next three years and enable us to measure our success.
The Department’s Strategic Priorities for the period 2021-2023 are:
1. Manage COVID-19 and promote public health.
2. Expand and integrate care in the community.
3. Make access to healthcare fairer & faster.
4. Improve oversight and partnership in the sector.
5. Become an organisation fit for the future.
These priorities fulfil the following criteria: They will deliver on commitments made in the Programme for Government.
They will progress Sláintecare reforms.
They are necessary in the context of COVID-19.
They are priorities that the Department of Health, in its unique role, must respond to or lead on.
The first three priorities focus on policy and reform and are essential for the delivery of Sláintecare.
These priorities incorporate the initiatives within the Sláintecare Strategic Action Plan 2021 -2023 around improving timely access to care and addressing health inequalities.
The fourth and fifth priorities focus on strengthening the Department’s core functions to ensure we deliver on our role.
All five priorities are important in their own right but they are also interlinked.
Progressing these priorities will require significant work, allocation of resources and collaborative working across the Department of Health.
The five strategic priorities are elaborated below including key initiatives and measures of success.
Strategic Priority 1
Manage COVID-19 and promote public health
What does this strategic priority mean?
Leading the public health response to COVID-19 and future preparedness for health protection.
Investing in, and developing, population health planning, prevention of illness and promotion of health and wellbeing.
Why this is a priority
The Department will continue to play a leading role in Ireland’s response to the Pandemic. The Programme for Government prioritises the protection public health, patients and to ensuring sufficient health service capacity.
Focus is likely to shift within the timeframe of this strategy. However, even after the immediate impact of the pandemic has passed, the longer term impacts of COVID-19 on health will require attention.
Given current trends and the projections for Ireland’s future demands for healthcare, the capacity of the health and social care service is not sustainable unless real progress is made in preventing illness and supporting people to live healthier lives including through implementation of the cross-Government Healthy Ireland Framework.
The key initiatives for the Department that could have most impact in the next three years are
Performance Metrics – How will we know that we have advanced this strategic priority?
Continue strong leadership on COVID-19 policy development, planning and management.
Vaccine uptake and COVID-19 successfully managed.
Population health planning approach in place.
Regular monitoring of health and wellbeing indicators.
Strengthen public health systems planning and preparedness.
Lead implementation of the Healthy Ireland Strategic Action Plan Phase 2 2020-2025 and drive prevention, citizen empowerment and obesity initiatives.
Deliver a citizen engagement and communications programme on public health and wellbeing.
Strategic Priority 2
Expand and integrate care in the community
What does this strategic priority mean?
Keeping people well at home, or near home, by expanding and increasing primary care and social care available in the community, within an integrated model of care across all settings.
Why this is a priority
The Programme for Government makes strong commitments to strengthen community-based care, including primary care and social care, and sees this as fundamental to advancing Sláintecare reforms.
Care in the community will be expanded in a way that integrates care across all relevant settings.
Enhanced integration will reduce the system’s dependency on acute hospital care through early and timely patient engagement with the primary and community care systems.
This will make it easier for people to access the care they need in a timely way, and will build on innovations that arose during the COVID-19 response.
The key initiatives for the Department that could have most impact in the next three years are
Progress expanded and integrated community care.
Ensure the necessary investment in and development of Community Healthcare Networks and specialist teams in the community (with a focus on older persons and chronic disease).
Develop a statutory home support scheme.
Older Persons’ Care – ensure delivery of the recommendations of the Nursing Homes Expert Panel.
Ensure timely implementation of Sharing the Vision: A Mental Health Policy for Everyone.
Scale and mainstream successful Sláintecare Integration Fund projects.
Performance Metrics – How will we know that we have advanced this strategic priority?
Progress on targets set out in the Health Service Capacity Review (2018) including on infrastructure and workforce.
Increased investment in primary and community care as a percentage of total services delivery budget.
Higher proportion of services delivered in the community.
Greater use of technology in service delivery and citizen engagement. Measurement of and improved performance on service user feedback.
Cross cutting initiatives required to advance Strategic Priorities 2 and 3 Implement and resource the Sláintecare Strategic Action Plan 2021-2023 to accelerate reform, specifically the programmes Improving Timely Access to Care and Addressing Health Inequalities.
Progress population health profiling, align it to health and social care needs assessment, and use it to develop a population-based resource allocation model and structural reforms.
eHealth – accelerate work on Individual Health Identifier (IHI) and Shared Care Record as well as eHealth infrastructure.
Develop and agree a plan for expanding eligibility for public healthcare services.
Enhance capacity across primary, community and acute settings, including additional infrastructure, staffing, and diagnostics in line with the implementation of the Health Service Capacity Review 2018.
Implement our national strategies to underpin a whole-of-system approach to care (see appendix III).
Strategic Priority 3
Make access to healthcare fairer and faster
What does this strategic priority mean?
Health and social care based on need and not on ability to pay.
A whole-of-system approach to support better health outcomes through the right care delivered in the right place at the right time, importantly addressing fundamental health inequalities.
Why this is a priority
The Programme for Government commits to providing fairer and more affordable care, promoting women’s health and a range of initiatives targeting marginalized groups to ensure our services meet everyone’s needs.
Improving timely access to care and addressing health inequalities are two key Sláintecare Reform Programmes.
These are more important than ever and also more challenging in the context of COVID-19 and its aftermath.
The key initiatives for the Department that could have most impact in the next three years are
Advance Sláintecare reforms to improve timely access to care.
Develop a multi-annual waiting list plan, encompassing measurement of time to treatment, and align workforce.
Oversee delivery of significant extra capacity in acute hospitals, including through new Elective Ambulatory Centres.
Implement hospital productivity measures in line with the Health Service Capacity Review 2018.
Implement the Sláintecare public-only consultant contract.
Further develop the National Clinical Programmes, supported by robust clinical governance structures.
Promote NPSO initiatives for patient engagement and advocacy, improved patient experience and open disclosure, complaints and incidents policy, and infection prevention and control and anti-microbial resistance.
Fairer Advance Sláintecare reforms to address health inequalities.
Develop a population-based approach to resources allocation and develop Healthy Communities, with a particular focus on deprived areas.
Develop the business case for a new system of governance and associated health system structures for Regional Health Areas.
Develop and implement key priorities within the Women’s Health Action Programme.
Support the full and effective participation of people with disabilities in society on an equal basis with others, in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Ensure the Department and agencies comply in full with the Public Sector Equality and Human Rights Duty.
Progress population health profiling, align it to health and social care needs assessment, and use it to develop a population-based resource allocation model and structural reforms.
eHealth – accelerate work on Individual Health Identifier (IHI) and Shared Care Record as well as eHealth infrastructure.
Develop and agree a plan for expanding eligibility for public healthcare services.
Enhance capacity across primary, community and acute settings, including additional infrastructure, staffing, and diagnostics in line with the implementation of the Health Service Capacity Review 2018.
Implement our national strategies to underpin a whole-of-system approach to care (see appendix III).
Performance Metrics – How will we know that we have advanced this strategic priority? Reductions in waiting times and waiting lists for acute and community services.
Improved patient experience measured through National Care Experience Programme and other channels.
Trends and shifts in activity from in-patient to community and day care. Improved access to care for socially excluded groups – including Travellers, Roma, people who are homeless, asylum seekers, refugees and people who use drugs.
Improved health outcomes and experiences for women and girls.
Progress on targets set out in the Health Service Capacity Review (2018) including on infrastructure and workforce, including workforce mix, in acute and community settings.
Strategic Priority 4
Improve oversight and partnership in the sector
What does this strategic priority mean?
Ensuring processes, governance structures and regulatory frameworks are in place in the health and social care sector, with effective oversight by the Department.
Enhancing the Department’s own internal structures, processes and governance capabilities to support better performance oversight.
Working in partnership with the HSE, and all our agencies, to deliver key strategies and reforms, including through strong performance monitoring and management, with a focus on financial control and outcomes.
Why this is a priority
The Programme for Government prioritises cross-public service collaboration and recognises the importance of regular and open engagement with all sectors of society.
Governance and oversight are core functions of the Department.
They have never been more important – to address the impact of the pandemic on health and social care, drive the Sláintecare reform agenda, and ensure value for money in public investment in health and social care.
Good governance and systems underpin and ensure the delivery of high quality and safe health and social care to patients and service users.
Oversight drives improved performance management and improved performance.
The Department will continue to collaborate to ensure the alignment of all our aegis bodies to deliver the Sláintecare vision.
Key initiatives for the Department that could have most impact in the next three years are:
Performance Metrics – How will we know that we have advanced this strategic priority?
Strengthen our partnerships and ways of working with all our agencies.
Delivery of the Health System Performance Assessment Framework Strengthen the Department’s internal structures, processes, governance and oversight capabilities. Performance management framework (internally and externally) operating effectively
Strengthen financial control mechanisms and broaden the base of financial expertise across the Department; work towards multi-annual budgeting; develop a Strategic Framework for Investment in Health Infrastructure; and embed the Public Spending Code in the health sector. Value for money improving
Accurate timely data available to Department, and aligned with decision making processes, through improved HSE health information systems
Progress NPSO initiatives for patient safety including the DOH/HSE Patient Safety Communications Protocol, surveillance reporting, clinical effectiveness and audit, and regulation for quality.
NPSO key metrics for patient safety including measures for person-centredness, patient safety and effectiveness Good working relationships with agencies, with clarity of respective roles
Continue to enhance regulatory policy and develop legislative frameworks across the health and social care sector including of health professionals, services, service providers and products.
Complete and implement the Health Information Systems Strategy, including a data governance focus.
Develop a Health Workforce Planning Strategy and Planning Projection Model.
Annually review the oversight agreement with the HSE to ensure clarity of roles and responsibilities and to facilitate effective oversight and accountability.
Reduce avoidable state claims by improving quality delivery.
Strengthen engagement with the voluntary healthcare sector including through the Dialogue Forum.
Proactively lead and oversee climate mitigation and adaptation actions for the health and social care sector.
Strategic Priority 5
Become an organisation fit for the future
What does this strategic priority mean?
Ensuring the Department has the right capabilities, people, structure and culture to advance our mission.
All staff are valued and empowered to contribute to the organisation’s mission.
Why this is a priority
The Programme for Government emphasises the importance of efficient public services and promotes structures for talent development in Government departments.
A high performing, fit-for-purpose Department is essential to the delivery of all other strategic priorities.
The Department has important responsibilities to fulfil as an employer.
Key initiatives for the Department that could have most impact in the next three years are:
Complete and implement the Organisational Design project, to include capability development and assessment of staff numbers required to achieve the strategic priorities.
Develop an Innovation Strategy and governance processes.
Expand ICT to support our core functions and remote working.
Become a more strategic Department through development of enhanced planning, change management, foresight, innovation, risk and project management capabilities, within a stronger governance architecture.
Performance Metrics – How will we know that we have advanced this strategic priority?
Organisational design project implemented Right-sized organisation, with sufficient staff, with the right skill mix, to fulfill our functions Reduced staff turnover
Improvements in Civil Service Employee Engagement Survey results
Learning and Development targets - including the percentage of staff who have completed strategyrelevant training
Ensure we are driven by evidence through increased capability in data analytics, health intelligence, research, evaluation, and policy development methods, with support for continuous learning and improving.
Become a more open Department through increased citizen, service user and stakeholder engagement, participation and empowerment, and increased diversity of the workforce.
Implement a Department of Health People Strategy, respond to Employee Engagement Surveys, and undertake a culture audit.
Develop our HR Strategy by becoming an employer of choice, developing our approach to recruitment and retention of staff, and implementing a medium term plan for remote working. Strengthen cross-government collaboration capability, and international and North/ South focus.
Delivering our Strategy
This Statement of Strategy will guide the Department of Health’s work for the next three years and its implementation will strengthen our strategic capacity as an organisation.
How the Department will implement and monitor the Strategy
The Department will implement the Statement of Strategy through: specific implementation processes for the Statement of Strategy put in place, including clear ownership within the Department; staff engagement; organisational leadership and governance structures put in place; internal alignment with other strategic processes and with our business planning process; allocation of resources to support the delivery of the strategic priorities; external collaboration and alignment with agencies and partners; and monitoring, evaluation, accountability and learning mechanisms put in place.
We will measure our success by tracking: high level performance metrics relating to the five strategic priorities, as outlined above; the delivery of our strategic initiatives; and the establishment and functioning of the processes and structures put in place to deliver the strategy.
These metrics will assist us in measuring our success as we move through the next three-year cycle.
We will also deliver an annual report against this Statement of Strategy and an annual learning exercise and refresh of the Strategy to ensure this is a living document that remains responsive to our environment.
The environmental analysis completed during the development of this Strategy presented a range of opportunities to strengthen our contribution.
Our evolving internal and external environmental contexts will also guide and shape how the Strategy is delivered.
Developing our Internal Environment
This is the corporate strategy for the Department of Health over the next three years, and as such it contains a strong focus on attending to our internal environment and strengthening the Department.
This focus on strengthening our organisation is highlighted in strategic priorities 4 and 5 and is captured in our values and the key enablers outlined below, which will provide the supports that will make it possible for the Department to achieve its strategic priorities.
This focus on our organisation is necessary in order to deliver our Strategy and advance our mission.
The values of the Department will guide all of our work over the next three years.
They are the deeply ingrained principles that serve as our cultural cornerstones.
A dedication to putting the people of Ireland and users of our health and social care services at the centre of all our work, engaging them in the work that we do Key enablers
1. Empowered teams and collaborative working
In line with the Public Sector Duty and Our Public Service 2020, we are committed to a culture of respect, collaboration and innovation, where staff feel empowered in their roles and supported in the pursuit of a healthy work/life balance.
As the complexity of our work has increased, the need to collaborate both internally and externally to tackle some of society’s biggest challenges is even greater.
We will learn from and leverage best practice to strengthen our adaptability and capability through innovative, collaborative policy-making and new ways of working together.
2. Organisational structures and resources Our capacity to deliver on our functions, and the work that is required of us, depends on adequate resourcing and organisation.
Significant internal reorganisation has taken place to ensure the delivery of immediate priorities, including the COVID-19 response, but we must also be well-equipped for the delivery of reform and our longer-term priorities.
It is essential that our organisational structure and design, and our staff complement, are fit for purpose.
We will enhance our remote working capability and work towards the Programme for Government mandate for public sector employers to move to 20% home and remote working in 2021. A strong commitment to respect and the fair and equal treatment of all
An open culture that encourages collaboration, innovation, and forward thinking
A deep-rooted ethos of integrity, impartiality, and value for money.
3. Data, technology and digitisation Advancement in health systems information, and innovations in technology and digitisation, are vital in underpinning an evidence-based approach to policy making that is person-centred and delivers on strategic priorities.
Data is also of crucial importance to government for supporting decision-making, shaping policy and facilitating the effective delivery of public services.
We will finalise and deliver on the Health Information System Strategy and additional investments in our infrastructure to ensure that we are equipped to do our work.
4. Innovation
As an organisation, we are committed to embracing innovation in line with Making Innovation Real, the Public Service Innovation Strategy (2020), and Our Public Service 2030.
The COVID-19 pandemic response sparked innovation across the health system, including in the Department of Health, and the insights and lessons learned from this will be identified and built upon.
There is also broader potential for further collaboration between the health service and the enterprise sector.
We will develop an Innovation Strategy as a key enabler for the actions described in this Statement of Strategy, and will embrace innovative methods of working across our policy development and research functions in particular.
5. Stakeholder collaboration and alignment We are part of the wider civil service and work alongside other Government Departments to serve the people of Ireland.
We work closely with other Departments to deliver the Programme for Government and play a leadership role in the implementation of specific governmental priorities including, in particular, the Healthy Ireland Framework and the public health response to COVID-19.
We will continue working in cooperation with other government departments on the wider determinants of health in order to prevent illness, and on the proposed development of wellbeing indicators.
We are committed to playing our part in the delivery of key cross-governmental initiatives, including climate action and ensuring equality.
The Department of Health and the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY) are working closely to ensure a smooth transfer of
responsibility for specialist disability services to DCEDIY, while the Department of Health will continue to oversee any residual functions relating to access to health services that are retained.
The Department will continue to support the obligations in the Disability Act 2005 to include people with disabilities in mainstream services.
Further, and in line with HSE guidance, general health and social care teams will work to deliver services that are accessible to all people with disabilities.
Within the health sector, we are committed to ongoing engagement and communication with stakeholders in all aspects of our work.
As part of our mission to create a more responsive, integrated and person-centred health and social care service, we are dependent on sustained engagement to understand and deliver on the needs of the Irish public.
We are committed to working for and in partnership with the public in all we do, through collaborative policy-making, and by engaging local communities, health and social care providers (including voluntary providers) and other stakeholders through key programmes including Sláintecare, Healthy Ireland and the Women’s Health Taskforce.
As we have seen during the COVID-19 emergency, if we are to make progress on key health and social care initiatives like Healthy Ireland or Sláintecare, the Department must represent a trusted and leading voice on health in Ireland.
By engaging consistently with service users, the public, and providers and staff across the health and social care system, we will work together to deliver on our collective vision for the future.
Coherence and alignment with our agencies, partners and other key stakeholders is essential to advance the strategic priorities set out in this Strategy 2021-23.
Responding to our External Environment
An analysis of our external environment has informed the development of this Statement of Strategy.
The current environment presents the Department of Health with a range of opportunities to strengthen our contribution and this Statement of Strategy provides our framework for responding.
The Department will continue to take a leading role in Ireland’s response to the pandemic, working alongside the HSE, and the broad spectrum of health and social care providers, other Government Departments and with the people of Ireland.
Nobody is unaffected by the pandemic and the consequences on our people’s health and wellbeing are not yet fully known.
Addressing the COVID-19 pandemic and its wider impact on health and service delivery will continue to be the Department’s top priority for as long as is necessary.
2. Political Landscape
The Programme for Government provides the Government’s priorities and commitments.
Those commitments relevant to the Department of Health are listed in Appendix II.
Sláintecare was drawn up with cross-party political support, representing a unique platform and opportunity for collaboration towards the transformation of our health and social care services.
The Programme for Government reiterates the Government’s commitment to Sláintecare and this Statement of Strategy outlines the Department’s role in leading on the Sláintecare programme of reform.
3. Changing Demographics
Ireland’s shifting demographic profile contributes to the need for reform of the health system as reported in the Department of Health’s Health Service Capacity Review 2018.
The Capacity Review indicated a need for significant expansion in the capacity of the health service, as well as substantial reform in how services are delivered.
Sláintecare represents the framework for these reforms.
Our first three strategic priorities represent our commitment to the necessary policy development and reform to meet the future needs of our population.
4. Economic Outlook
Resource pressures can be anticipated as a feature of the health and social care landscape over this strategic period 2021-23, particularly in the context of the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and of Brexit.
The significant increase in investment in health and social care in Budget 2021 represents a real opportunity to deliver on national health and social care strategies and reform priorities.
Significant additional resources secured in Budget 2021 will drive and support the management of COVID-19 in tandem and as part of overall health service delivery and reform.
Strategic priority 4 outlines the initiatives we will take towards ensuring value for money in relation to this investment.
5. Public Engagement and Trust 6. Equality and Equity
The Department of Health serves the people of Ireland.
We are committed to engaging and involving patients and people in their own health and wellbeing, and care and treatment, as well as improving citizen participation in policy-making.
This is essential to achieving our vision.
The pandemic has transformed public knowledge and perception of the Department of Health.
During the COVID-19 pandemic the impact of Government decision-making and the important role that the civil service plays has become clearer than ever before for many.
With an unprecedented investment in health and social care services in 2021, the continuing threat of the pandemic, and advancements in technology and communications, public expectation is higher than ever.
Increased awareness of the role of the Department of Health, due to our role in the COVID-19 response, presents an opportunity to build on a high level of public engagement with health issues and to further strengthen our partnership with the Irish public.
The Public Sector Duty under Section 42 of the Irish Human Rights and Equality Act 2014 outlines the Department’s responsibility to eliminate discrimination, promote equality and protect human rights of staff and service users.
The Department of Health has specific responsibilities and this Statement of Strategy emphasises our commitments through strategic priority 3 and embedding equality as one of our core values.
In particular: The Department of Health will address health inequalities in line with the reform programme detailed in the Sláintecare Strategic Action Plan 2021 -2023.
The Department of Health will continue to promote compliance with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the health (including mental health) and social care sphere.
The Department is demonstrating its commitment to the Public Sector Duty through specific commitments including: a committment to undertake a Public Sector Duty Self-Assessment; engaging with bodies under our aegis to ensure that they comply with the Public Sector Duty; implementing Department of Health actions within relevant National Strategies, listed in Appendix III, many of which cover services for marginalised groups; and reporting on progress towards our commitment to the Public Sector Duty in our annual report.
7. International Landscape
8. Climate Action
International trends and obligations shape our environment.
There is a strong international focus on progress in the areas of Universal Health Coverage, primary health care and non-communicable diseases, as well as pandemic preparedness and global health security.
Ireland’s Sustainable Development Goals National Implementation Plan 2018-2020 sets out the Government’s ambitious response to the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and commits Ireland to fully achieving all 17 of the Goals by 2030.
This Department will continue to work with the Department of Environment, Climate and Communications and relevant partners in order to achieve the relevant SDG targets, with a focus on SDG3 Good Health and Wellbeing.
The UK’s exit from the EU will also continue to demand significant engagement, planning and agile management on the part of the Department, the HSE and other agencies.
Climate change represents a significant challenge to the health and social care system as we must confront both our contributions to emissions and waste production, and also the adverse health impacts threatened by air and water pollution and general environmental degradation.
These risks include rising levels of chronic disease, respiratory illness, and infectious disease, and the potential for more frequent pandemics.
As part of the Government’s vision for Universal Healthcare, the Programme for Government commits to the delivery of “sustainable care”, highlighting climate consciousness as key to achieving long-term health goals for Ireland.
The Department of Health has published its Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Health Sector 20192024.
The Department supports and aligns with cross-governmental initiatives including those laid out in the Climate Change Action Plan 2019, the Public Sector Mandate, the Sustainable Development Goals National Implementation Plan, the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill and the Decarbonisation Strategy forthcoming in 2021.
Our policy-making is informed by international thinking and best practice and we share both our data and our experience widely through both formal and informal international partnerships and networks.
The Department is committed to a continuing contribution to shape EU processes and outcomes as they affect the citizen.
The Department will continue to contribute internationally and to learn from international best practice, including through engagement and collaboration with other international bodies such as the World Health Organization (WHO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and others.
The Department is committed to strengthening our leadership role, our oversight function in the sector, and our cross government engagement on climate action.
Our commitment will be demonstrated in this strategic cycle through: appointment of dedicated staff on climate change; adherence to the forthcoming Public Sector Mandate and direction of bodies under our aegis to adopt a climate mandate; compliance with the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill; implementation of the Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Health Sector (2019-2024); continued implementation of the Climate Action Plan 2019 and contribution to, and implementation of, the Climate Action Plan 2021; examination of WHO recommendations and best practice approaches to reducing waste and improving ecological practice in health care; and commitment to actions in the forthcoming Decarbonisation Strategy and compliance with reporting measures applying across the Public Sector.
The Department of Health holds a unique role in a complex system.
Over the next three years, this Statement of Strategy will guide our work as we collaborate with colleagues across government, our agencies, the public and all stakeholders in the health and social care sector towards our shared vision of ‘a healthier Ireland, with improved health and wellbeing for all, and with the right care, delivered in the right place, at the right time’.
We will strengthen our organisation to develop and harness the capability of our staff, who are our most important asset.
We will remain responsive and adaptable to our national and international environment, learning from and sharing best practice.
Most importantly, we will work with and be accountable to the Irish public as we deliver on our strategic priorities, serving them in all the work that we do.
How the Department of Health developed its Statement of Strategy
Strategic review
Review of key documents and environmental analysis
Consultation
Internal and external consultation
Gaining buy in throughout process
Analysis and Drafting
Analysing research findings and consultation feedback to draft Statement of Strategy
Overview
This Statement of Strategy for the Department of Health has been written in accordance with the Public Service Management Act of 1997.
The Act indicates that a Department is required to submit to the Minister of the Government a strategy statement in respect of the Department i) within 6 months after the appointment of a new Minister of the Government having charge of the Department or Scheduled Office, and ii) at the expiration of the 3 year period since the last such statement was prepared and submitted.
The formation of a new Government in July 2020, and the subsequent appointment of a new Minister for Health, thus necessitated the development of a Statement of Strategy for the Department.
A project team was convened in September 2020, to develop and submit a completed Strategy document to the Minister for Health by December 2020.
In that timeframe, the project team undertook a detailed process of strategic review, consultation, analysis and drafting as described below.
The process was designed to produce a Statement of Strategy for the Department of Health that articulates the mediumterm priorities of the organisation, providing strategic direction and clarity for the years 2021-2023.
A successful Statement of Strategy will be a touchstone for colleagues in developing and aligning their dayto-day work, while communicating to the public and a broad range of stakeholders the Department’s priorities for the coming period and how they fit into a long-term vision for health.
Strategic Review
The project team undertook an extensive strategic review in the initial phases of development for this Statement of Strategy.
The objectives of this strategic review were to: learn from previous Statements of Strategy (those belonging to the Department of Health, other government departments and private sector bodies); compile relevant information from strategic documents that will inform our priorities for the coming period e.g. Department of Health commitments to national strategies, relevant information related to the environmental context; gather important information related to the Department’s obligations as a public sector body e.g. obligations to climate action articulated in the Programme for Government and obligations to the IHREC Public Sector Duty; and inform consultation with key stakeholders.
Documents deemed relevant to the review met at least one of the following criteria: Include elements required to be included in the Statement of Strategy as referenced in the Guidelines Major Department of Health strategies, priorities and/or obligations Government and/or cross departmental strategies, priorities, risks, or issues
The project team reviewed a total of 89 documents in the initial review phase, across six types of document, summarised in the table below.
Specific attention was paid to key strategic documents including the Programme for Government and Sláintecare documents.
Total number of documents reviewed:
Number of Department of Health Reports and key strategies with links to the Programme for Government
Number of HSE/agency documents
Number of cross departmental documents
Number of international documents
Number of documents informed by citizen perspectives
Number of other Statements of Strategy reviewed
This review contributed to the Department’s understanding of its environmental context, the role of the organisation in leading the health and social care sector, the views of stakeholders and, ultimately, to the determination of strategic priorities.
Consultation
Consultation was core to the development of this Statement of Strategy.
It was important to engage with stakeholders internally and externally across the health and social care system to understand: how staff view the challenges and opportunities facing the Department, and gain their input on the priorities of the Department in the medium-term; how the Statement of Strategy might best provide strategic direction for staff; and how stakeholders outside the Department, including the public and the Department’s agencies, see the Department’s role and their views on what the Department should prioritise in its role in the medium term to deliver on the long-term vision for the health and social care system.
Over a 6-week period, the Department engaged in a detailed consultation process.
Internal consultation included engagement with:
Minister for Health, Ministers of State; Acting Secretary General and Management Board; a cross-divisional reference group, with three workshops held;
Management Board’s subcommittees on risk and policy; all-staff via internal survey; internal senior management networks via workshops; and colleagues expert in areas related to strategic priorities via workshops.
Analysis and Drafting
The analysis and drafting stage of developing this Statement of Strategy was an iterative process.
Gathering the information collected through the initial strategic review and consultation phases, the project team produced analyses of internal and external factors that could affect the progression of strategic priorities.
This analysis accounted for internal strengths and weaknesses as well as external factors such as the political context, advances in technology, and economic trends.
Situating the results of extensive consultation in these contexts, the project team produced multiple drafts of this strategic document, which were tested in various iterations with stakeholders including internal subject matter experts and presented to senior management for review.
External consultation included: a inter-departmental group working on Statements of Strategy was convened by the Department of Health and held 2 meetings including inputs on the Public Sector Duty from IHREC and on climate action from the Department of Environment, Climate and Communications; invitation of submissions from other government departments; public consultation via online survey which received 2555 responses; consultation with the HSE and aegis bodies – 14 submissions received; and
In December 2020, the Department project team for the Statement of Strategy submitted a draft to the Acting Secretary General for approval.
It was then submitted to the Minister for final approval ahead of submission to the Oireachtas, in line with the requirements of the Public Service Management Act 1997.
Ahead of publication, the Statement of Strategy was translated into Irish as per the requirements of the Official Languages Act 2003.
The Strategy and supporting documents were published on the Department of Health’s website.
additional consultation with external experts on risk and strategy.
These consultations formed a vital part of the development process for this Statement of Strategy, ensuring that it reflects a shared vision for the future of the health and social care service.
Programme for Government Commitments
Programme forGovernment Sub-Category
Department of Health Commitment
Public Finances and Taxation
We will examine, in advance of Budget 2022, appropriate funding measures to support the implementation of Sláintecare.
Delivery of Care in a COVID-19 environment
Quickly identify the impact of COVID-19 on Sláintecare implementation
Examine new ways to utilise community settings and create partnerships with our private Environment hospitals to avoid placing increased pressure on the public system
Ensure capacity, particularly bed and critical care capacity, for a COVID-19 rapid response and for non-COVID-19 emergencies into the longer term
Prioritise the elective-only programme to treat patients and to manage the reduced capacity, as a result of COVID-19.
Maintain an intense focus on COVID-19 and follow four guiding principles: isolate, test, trace and treat, to enable a speedy reaction, should there be an increase in cases.
Continue to deploy new technologies, telehealth, and innovative ways to support vulnerable groups, as well as new pathways of care.
Ensure that patients and healthcare staff are kept informed of and fully engaged in changes in healthcare practice, due to COVID-19 Maintain ongoing monitoring of international experience and knowledge to assist in ensuring the safety of patients and healthcare workers.
We will examine international public health models, learning from best practice, and reshape our public health system, to ensure an agile and well-planned response to future epidemics. Implementing
Sláintecare
The response to the COVID-19 Emergency has demonstrated that by working together, we can make progress and achieve these aims in the longer term.
It has also necessitated new ways of delivering care.
We must ensure that these new models meet demand, while taking account of lower occupancy rates and the longer time now needed to prepare for procedures.
Many of the healthcare responses to COVID-19 are important elements of Sláintecare, and we will identify how to keep the gains.
We will maintain leadership at the highest level, with the Cabinet Committee on Health, chaired by the Taoiseach, giving overall strategic direction, and overseeing the implementation of Sláintecare.
Programme for Government
Department of Health Commitment
Implementing Sláintecare: Structural Reform
Bring forward detailed proposals on the six new regional health areas to deliver local services for patients that are safe, high quality and fairly distributed.
Implementing Sláintecare: Fairer and Affordable Care
Increase homecare hours and introduce a Statutory Homecare Scheme.
Extend free GP care to carers in receipt of the Carer’s Support Grant.
Abolish in-patient hospital charges for children.
Reduce prescription charges and the Drug Payment Scheme threshold.
Increase the income threshold on medical cards for people over 70.
Extend discretionary medical cards to those with a terminal illness.
Introduce a cap on the maximum daily charge for car parking for patients and visitors at all public hospitals, where possible.
Introduce flexible passes in all public hospitals for patients and their families.
Establish a National Medicines Agency, promoting national prescribing to reduce the cost of medicines, including via generic prescription, where appropriate, and to set a fair price for drug reimbursement.
Retain access to private health services, ensuring choice for those accessing health care.
Implementing Sláintecare: Deliver More Community
Developing Community Healthcare Networks to support the expansion of services, based on the need and size of local populations.
Targeting an increase in opening times for unscheduled care, radiology, and diagnostic services in the community.
Strengthening general practice – implementing the contract with GPs, sustaining out-ofhours and rural services, and increasing GP training places, including for GPs with Special Interest qualifications.
Establishing a ‘Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools (DEIS)’ type programme for health, providing GP practices, community pharmacies and public health staff with dedicated additional resources to communities, focused on improved health outcomes and driven by strong data.
Rolling out the chronic disease management programme.
Increasing telemedicine and virtual clinics, based on the very positive usage and experience during the COVID-19 crisis.
Supporting the Dialogue Forum working with voluntary organisations to build a stronger working relationship between the State and the voluntary healthcare sector.
Commencing talks with our pharmacists on a new contract and enhancement of their role in the delivery of healthcare in the community, including via e-prescribing and issuance of repeat prescriptions.
Supporting the expansion of community ophthalmology and the wider adoption of the Sligo pilot model.
Department of Health Commitment
Implementing Sláintecare:
Increase Capacity
Continue to invest in healthcare infrastructure and equipment, together with the recommendations of the Capacity Review, in line with Project Ireland 2040.
Ensure capacity for a COVID-19 rapid response, including bed and ICU capacity and for non-COVID emergencies into the longer term, by utilising some private hospital capacity, if necessary.
Open the National Children’s Hospital.
Deliver the second cath lab in University Hospital Waterford.
Conclude the governance arrangements and commence the building of the new maternity Hospital at St Vincent’s Hospital, Dublin.
Provide new radiation oncology facilities in Galway and Dublin.
Through the Design and Dignity Programme, renovate and renew eleven mortuaries across the country.
Increase capacity in our National Ambulance Service and expand Community First Responder schemes.
Work with the HSE to improve palliative care across the country, by aiming to ensure a seamless pathway for palliative care patients across in-patient, homecare, nursing home and day care services.
Implementing Sláintecare: Ehealth and ICT
Invest in a modern eHealth and ICT infrastructure, in line with Project Ireland 2040 and the eHealth Strategy for Ireland.
Build on the progress already made in responding to COVID-19, by working with GPs to improve eHealth measures, and providing for the secure electronic sharing of patient information, lab results, diagnostic imaging reports, and prescription orders between medical providers.
Roll out the Individual Health Identifier programme, ensuring that patient information is accessible across different services to improve patient safety.
This will allow patients direct access to view and correct inaccurate information.
Implement an Electronic Health Record system in the new National Children’s Hospital and prepare to roll it out nationwide.
Explore the potential for introducing a 24-hour triage and health-concerns telephone and website service, which will help to direct patients into appropriate streams of care.
Recruit additional frontline community staff, including public health nurses and allied health professionals, such as occupational therapists, physiotherapists, dementia advisers and speech and language therapists.
Continue to implement the Nursing Agreement, which includes additional measures to assist with the recruitment and retention of nurses into the public health service.
Establish an expert group on nursing and midwifery to advance the nursing and midwifery professions.
Engage with radiographers, paramedics, and healthcare assistants on how their roles can be developed.
Increase the number of public-only consultants in our hospitals.
Implement the GP contract.
Transfer GP training to the Irish College of General Practitioners.
Establish a workforce planning expert unit to work with the education sectors, regulators, and professional bodies to improve the availability of health professionals and reform their training to support integrated care across the entire health service.
Require continuous professional development for all staff in the health sector.
Department of Health Commitment
Implementing Sláintecare: More Compassionate Care
Enact the Patient Safety (Notifiable Patient Safety Incidents) Bill 2019, providing for mandatory open disclosure.
Enhance the patient safety role of HIQA.
Continue to support the National Patient Advocacy Service and the work of the National Patient Safety Office (NPSO) in overseeing a programme of patient safety improvements and reforms
Reassess how claims for medical negligence are handled in Ireland, including the role of the State Claims Agency, so that the Irish medical negligence regime is brought into line with other OECD countries following from the Meenan Report.
Examine the potential to legislate for mediation as a first resort for disputes involving medical negligence in health care.
Introduce a package of supports for those affected by patient safety incidents, at the same time as an open disclosure, and ensure that an apology is made.
Focus on Rare Diseases
Publishing an updated National Rare Diseases Plan.
Promoting research and, in particular clinical trials, which are key to improving the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of rare diseases. Enacting the National Research Ethics Committee Bill.
Establishing a National Genetics and Genomics Medicine Network.
Supporting the medical genetics service in Our Lady’s Children Hospital, Crumlin.
Implementing National Health Strategies
We will continue implementing the National Cancer Strategy; Trauma Strategy; National Dementia Strategy; National Maternity Strategy; Neuro Rehabilitation Strategy; National Clinical Programme for Stroke.
Organ Donations
Enact the Human Tissue Bill, providing the legal basis for an opt-out system of organ donation and deliver a public information campaign.
Sustainable Care
Examine WHO recommendations and best practice approaches to reducing waste and improving ecological practice in health care.
Promoting Women's Health
Support the work of the Women’s Health Taskforce, including the development of a Women’s Women’s Health Health Action Plan, to tackle a wide range of issues impacting women’s health outcomes in Ireland.
Promote an increase in the number of new mothers breastfeeding, by increasing support in our maternity hospitals and primary care centres, through access to lactation specialists and public health nurses.
Fully implement the recommendations contained in Dr Scally’s Report of the Scoping Inquiry, and all other reports into CervicalCheck Support the CervicalCheck Screening Programme and promote the uptake of the HPV vaccine.
Provide free contraception over a phased period, starting with women aged 17-25.
Enact the Assisted Human Reproduction (AHR) Bill.
Introduce a publicly funded model of care for fertility treatment.
Extend BreastCheck to those aged 69.
Implement the National Maternity Strategy, to support recruitment and training of additional key midwifery and medical staff, options for homebirth, access to dating and anomaly scanning in all maternity units, and care pathway across the maternity network.
Progress the planning, tender and design stages for the relocation of the Coombe Hospital to St James’s, the Rotunda Hospital to Connolly, and Limerick University Maternity Hospital to University Hospital Limerick.
Establish exclusion zones around medical facilities.
Note the review, as required under Section 7 of the Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy Act 2018, which will take place in 2021.
Healthier Future: Tobacco and Nicotine
Ban the sale of nicotine-inhaling products, including e-cigarettes, to people under 18 years, introduce a licensing system for the retail sale of nicotine-inhaling products, and restrict the types of retailers that can sell these products.
Curb the advertising of nicotine-inhaling products near schools, on public transport, and in cinemas.
Healthier Future: Exercise
Promote more physical exercise among all sections of the community, young and old, for the long-term health and benefit of society.
Extend the Oral Health Promotion Programme to reach all children in primary schools. Work to encourage increased participation in Physical Education in primary and secondary education.
Support SMEs to have adequate shower and changing facilities to assist workers who cycle and run to work.
Encourage close collaboration between the Departments of Education, Health and Sport and sporting organisations to encourage and enable physical activity among children, in particular at primary school.
Healthier Future: Screening and Immunisation
Remain committed to protecting the nation’s health and wellbeing through immunisation, infectious disease control, and the continued support of our screening programmes.
Examine the possibility of introducing a national immunisation register.
Extend BreastCheck to women aged 69 and BowelScreen to all aged 55-74.
Make the flu vaccine available to more people, without charge.
Continue to support the National Vaccine Alliance in promoting the uptake of childhood vaccines and reducing vaccine hesitancy.
Examine the inclusion of the chicken pox vaccine in the children’s immunisation schedule.
Following completion of the work of the Health Research Board on approaches to vaccination in other countries, act on its advice and recommendations.
Mental Health
Promoting positive mental health and reducing the burden of mental illness can have benefits for everyone.
The outbreak of COVID-19 in Ireland has created significant anxiety, stress and fear for many people, reinforcing the need for a range of mental health supports and services.
We should aim to become an international leader in supporting and caring for people with mental health needs.
Mental Health: Sharing the Vision
By providing more assistant psychologists, occupational therapists, and other key workers, we will create a flexible approach and encourage more collaboration with acute services and the voluntary and community sector.
We will ensure that any new services, such as outreach, are supported by community cafes and intensive rehabilitation units.
Care will be provided to vulnerable people in a variety of in-patient and community settings Through the promotion of digital health interventions such as online training, safe talk training and new pilot telepsychiatry services, including in an emergency department, we will significantly improve access to mental health services.
Mental Health: Implementation Plan
We will immediately establish a national implementation and monitoring committee, which will have representatives from the statutory, voluntary and community sectors.
Work to end the admission of children to adult psychiatric units, by increasing in-patient beds, as well as examining the model of assigning these beds.
Continue to support the expansion of Jigsaw services and their existing network of early intervention and prevention services and supports.
Integrate mental health services provided by nongovernmental organisations, with a system of care that includes local statutory and community services.
Continue to resource the national roll-out of the model care for Specialist Perinatal Mental Health, with the expansion of mental health supports to be made available to both parents and parents of adopted children.
Open the new National Forensic Mental Hospital in Portrane.
Implement the Pathfinder interdepartmental unit on youth mental health.
Examine a one-door policy, a single psychological assessment tool to determine the most appropriate service.
Extend the remit of the National Treatment Purchase Fund to secure timely assessment for both child and adult psychological services.
Seek to expand social prescribing where patients are referred to non-clinical activities, as a means of positively influencing mental wellbeing.
Complete the update of the 2001 Mental Health Act, including amendments to allow young people, aged 16- 17, the right to consent to treatment for their mental health.
Publish a Traveller and Roma Mental Health Action Plan. Examine the appointment of a Chief Psychiatrist in the Department of Health and a National Director for Mental Health in the HSE.
Increase the number of Authorised Officers to support families, in line with the Expert Group on the Review of the Mental Health Act 2001.
Examine extending the Patient Advocacy Service to support those accessing public mental health services.
Ensure that mental health services are accessible to people in the deaf community.
Promote mental health research to assist in better responding to the mental health needs of the population.
Health-led Approach to Drugs Misuse
Examine how we can continue to support Drug and Alcohol Task Forces in identifying local need in communities, and support targeted initiatives addressing drug and alcohol misuse.
We will ensure that a representative of the National Oversight Committee for Reducing Harm, Supporting Recovery is included in the implementation and monitoring arrangements for Sharing the Vision
Mental Health Policy for Everyone
We will implement the recommendations of the Working Group to Consider Alternative Approaches to the Possession of Drugs for Personal Use
We will undertake a review of this alternative approach, to ensure that it is meeting all of its aims, following the first full year of implementation, and make any necessary changes.
Recognising the additional risk faced by people who use drugs, specific actions have been taken to support increased and improved access to opioid substitution services during COVID-19.
We will seek to retain these measures to reduce waiting times in accessing these services.
Examine the regulations and legislation that apply to cannabis use for medical conditions and palliative care, having regard to the experience in Northern Ireland and Great Britain.
Convene a Citizens’ Assembly to consider matters relating to drugs use.
Build on recent initiatives at junior and senior cycle and support secondary schools in introducing drug and alcohol awareness programmes, particularly in relation to the hazards of casual drug use.
Examine approaches to identifying at-risk young people and vulnerable groups to interrupt their potential trajectory into problem drug and alcohol misuse.
Increase and support drug-quality testing services, particularly at festivals.
Recognise that women can face barriers to accessing and sustaining addiction treatment, arising from an absence of childcare or the presence of domestic violence, and develop targeted interventions aimed at responding to their needs.
Expand services for pregnant and post-natal women affected by substance use, and their children.
Examine the potential for an information campaign on the health impacts of steroid use, particularly on young men.
Create a path for people in rehabilitation from drug addiction to access education and training facilities in their local areas.
Re-establish the Galway City Community Based Alcohol Treatment Service.
Progress the National Clinical Programme for Dual Diagnosis and work to develop joint protocols and referral pathways.
Support the Drug Related Intimidation Reporting Programme, developed by the National Family Support Network, in partnership with An Garda Síochána, to respond to the needs of drug users and families facing the threat of drug-related intimidation.
Establish a 24-hour helpline, based on the FRANK helpline in the UK providing advice and assistance to people who use drugs and their family members.
Develop health and social interventions, based on an inclusion-health approach to target people who are homeless and in addiction.
Ensure in-reach supports and pathways to access to treatment for homeless, Traveller and new communities.
Increase the number of residential treatment beds for those stabilising, detoxing, and/or seeking drug-free services.
Significantly increase support for step-down accommodation to prevent high-risk single people and families from exiting treatment into homelessness.
Reduce the number of lives lost through overdose by opening a pilot medically supervised injecting facility in Dublin City.
Support the roll-out of access to, and training in, opioid antidotes.
Ensure a ‘Good Neighbour’ policy for drug treatment centres to address any concerns held by local residents and businesses alike.
Legislate against the coercion and use of minors in the sale and supply of drugs.
Continue to resource harm reduction and education campaigns aimed at increasing awareness of the risks of drug use and the contribution of drugs to criminality.
Age Friendly Ireland: Commission on Care
Learning from COVID-19, we will assess how we care for older people and examine alternatives to meet the diverse needs of our older citizens.
We will establish a commission to examine care and supports for older people.
Home and Community Care Support
Expand community-based care, bringing it closer to home, in line with the Sláintecare Implementation Plan.
Introduce a statutory scheme to support people to live in their own homes, which will provide equitable access to high-quality, regulated home care.
Increase homecare hours.
Expand Community Intervention Teams to prevent unnecessary hospital admissions and to support the timely discharge of patients to their homes.
Ensure that community services assign a case manager for older people with chronic conditions to assist them with accessing the care they need.
Develop the role of advanced nurse practitioners in older person services and chronic disease management.
Increase the availability of step-down facilities.
Support eHealth and the increased use of assistive technologies, supporting people to live independently.
Deliver a ‘Carers Guarantee’ proposal that will provide a core basket of services to carers across the country, regardless of where they live.
Increase access to talk therapies and improve access to specialist expertise, when it is required, in line with Sharing the Vision – a Mental Health Policy for Everyone.
Develop a plan aimed at tackling loneliness and isolation, particularly among older people, as outlined in the Roadmap for Social Inclusion.
Age Friendly Ireland: Delivering Choice
Embed ageing in place options for older people into the planning system, as the county and city development plans are redrawn this year.
Drawing on the Housing Need and Demand Assessments, develop demographic reporting tools and population projections to gain a better national understanding of the needs and location of housing options for older people.
Increase the provision of smaller homes in developments, ensuring that older people can remain living in their communities, close to essential services and facilities.
Task local authorities to work with Approved Housing Bodies, co-operatives, private developers, and Age Friendly Ireland on the development/redevelopment of older-person housing.
Maintain support for the Housing Adaptation Grant Scheme.
Promote active retirement and positive ageing initiatives to tackle social isolation.
Explore a new digital skills for citizens grant scheme, focusing on one-to-one training.
Ensure that older people who are at greater risk of fuel poverty and the respiratory illnesses associated with air pollution be prioritised in climate action and climate mitigation plans.
Encourage book clubs for older people to tackle loneliness.
Age Friendly Ireland: Longterm Residential Care
Work with the Nursing Home Expert Panel, which has been tasked with examining and advising on the ongoing COVID-19 response. Examine ways to improve integration with the health service and clarify clinical governance arrangements for nursing homes.
Support the Nursing Homes Support Scheme (The Fair Deal) to provide assistance when staying at home may no longer be an option.
Enact legislation implementing the revised Nursing Homes Support Scheme arrangements for farmers and business owners.
Ensure that no Nursing Homes Support Scheme resident is charged for services they do not use.
Examine extending the remit of the Patient Advocacy Service to residents of long-term residential care facilities.
Champion a whole-of-life approach to care and caring responsibilities.
Ensure that the best possible safeguards are in place to protect our friends and family in nursing homes.
Age Friendly Ireland: Enhancing Dementia Care
Implement the National Dementia Care Strategy.
Ensure that home support is adaptable and responsive to the needs of those with dementia. Increase the number of dementia advisers.
Investigate the possibility of establishing a dementia village along the lines of Hogeweyk, in the Netherlands.
Finalise a code of practice on Advanced Healthcare Directives, allowing for full commencement of the legislative framework.
Age Friendly Ireland: End-of-life Care
Increase the number of specialist palliative care beds countrywide over the next five years, ensuring that there will be a hospice serving every region in the country.
Open new units in Mayo, Waterford, and Wicklow in 2020.
Progress plans to build units in Drogheda and Cavan, and a further in-patient unit planned for the Midlands.
Support Community Specialist Palliative Home Care Teams in all HSE areas, fund designated home care packages, and resource specialist palliative care provided in hospices.
Increase resources for the Children’s Palliative Care Programme. This will be supported by consultants with a special interest in children’s palliative care and children’s outreach nurses to coordinate care for children with lifelimiting conditions and their families.
Publish a new Palliative Care Policy for Adults by mid- 2021 to update the 2001 policy.
This will reflect the many developments in end-of life care and international best practice and better interact with children’s palliative care.
Complete the research being carried out in association with the Irish Hospice Foundation into the cost of bereavement and funeral poverty in Ireland.
This research will inform our approach to determining any further interventions or supports the State can provide to alleviate any hardship associated with loss and bereavement.
Disability
Prioritise early diagnosis interventions and access to services.
Improve and change services through better implementation and collaboration.
Ensure that the most effective interventions are provided for each individual, to guarantee the best outcomes.
Seek to reduce the waiting times for assessment of need under the Disability Act 2005, through the full-year provision of additional therapy posts.
Fully implement the new standard operating procedure for assessment of needs for all applications.
Fully complete the establishment of the Progressing Disability Services for Children and Young People (0- 18 years) Network Teams.
Integrate access to mental health supports as part of disability service provision.
Continue with the successful decongregation programme and complete a further move of more people with disabilities from congregated settings to homes in the community, with the necessary supports.
People with disabilities and their families have been impacted by COVID-19 in many ways, whether from a move to delivering services online, or a reduction in services, to feelings of isolation.
A renewed focus on how we provide services is needed.
Work with all stakeholders to see how services and resources can be delivered.
Reduce and provide a pathway to eliminate the practice of accommodating young people with serious disabilities in nursing homes.
Work towards implementing the most recent Disability Capacity Review.
We are committed to the introduction of personalised budgets, improving the provision of services for people with disabilities through a range of options, including service brokers, and empowering people to choose the supports that most meet their needs.
This will be based on the experience of the pilot schemes.
Disability: Residential and Respite Care
Additional residential places and new emergency residential placements.
Additional appropriate residential places for people currently living in respite care, as an emergency response to their needs.
Further intensive transitional support packages for children and young people with complex/ high support needs.
Additional respite nights for people with disabilities.
Disability: Day Services and Supports
Work to expand adult day services and supports, throughout the country, for adults with physical and sensory disabilities, intellectual disability, and autism.
Disability: Autism Spectrum Disorders
Implement the National Autism Plan and keep it under regular review. Deliver increased home support and Personal Assistance hours.
Implement a programme of awareness-raising to provide a better information resource for children and parents about available supports.
Deliver a campaign to create awareness of the challenges, needs and experiences of people with autism spectrum disorder.
Build capacity and competence amongst key professionals working with people with autism, including a national training programme for clinicians.
The Programme for Government commits to the full implementation of the ‘One Health’ Strategy, placing particular focus on the connections between human, animal and environmental health and encouraging the optimal use of animal health products
Cross departmental
We will continue to work with colleagues across Government, delivering on our role in achieving a better quality of life for all.
We will continue to work with colleagues across Government, delivering on our role in reigniting and renewing the economy.
We will continue to work with colleagues across Government, delivering on our role in pursuing and implementing a Green New Deal.
We will continue to work across Government, delivering on our role in achieving balanced regional development.
We will continue to work across Government, delivering on our role in achieving a New Social Contract.
Work in this area includes: Review and update the National Carers’ Strategy.
We will continue to work across Government, delivering on our role in building stronger and safer communities.
We will continue to work across Government, delivering on our role in providing better opportunities through education and research.
We will continue to work across Government, delivering on our role in building a shared island.
We will continue to work across Government, delivering on our role in ensuring that Ireland is at the heart of Europe and Global citizenship.
We will continue to work across Government, delivering on our role in reforming and reimagining our public life.
We will continue to work across Government, delivering on our role in ensuring the effective functioning of Government.
List of National Strategies
List of Health Strategies The following is a non-exhaustive list of national health strategies as reflected in documents such as, among others, the Programme for Government, Budget 2021, and Implementing the Public Sector Equality and Human Rights Duty.
For up to date publications, please see the Department of Health website.
1. A Healthy Weight for Ireland: Obesity Policy and Action Plan 2016-2025
2. A Trauma System for Ireland: Report of the Trauma Steering Group
3. Connecting for Life: Ireland’s National Strategy to Reduce Suicide 2015-2024
5. Framework for Safe Nurse Staffing and Skill Mix in General and Specialist Medical and Surgical Care Settings in Ireland 2018
6. Healthy Ireland Framework 2019-2025
7. Housing Options for our Ageing Population: Policy Statement
9. Model of Care for Ambulatory Gynaecology
11. National Ambulance Service Strategic Plan 20162020
12. National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026
13. National Carers’ Strategy
14. National Dementia Strategy
15. National Maternity Strategy – Creating a Better Future Together 2016-2026
18. National Sexual Health Strategy 2015-2020
20. Paediatric Model of Care
21. Reducing Harm, Supporting Recovery: a health led response to drug and alcohol use in Ireland 2017-2025
22. Sharing the Vision: A Mental Health Policy for Everyone
23. Sláintecare Consultant Contract
24. Smile agus Sláinte – National Oral Health Policy 25. Taskforce on Staffing and Skill Mix
27. Tobacco Free Ireland 8. Ireland’s National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance 2017-2020 29. National Clinical Programme for Stroke
28. Health Service Capacity Review 2018
30. National Strategy & Policy for the Provision of Neuro-Rehabilitation Services in Ireland
31. Paediatric Services (including New Children’s Hospital)
32. Report of the National Advisory Committee of Palliative Care (2001)
Cross Governmental Strategies
The Department of Health is a partner in the delivery of multiple cross-governmental strategies, some of which are listed below.
The items marked below with an asterisk are those National Strategies highlighted by the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission as representing State commitments to human rights and equality (noted in Implementing the Public Sector Equality and Human Rights Duty).
1. Better Outcomes, Brighter Futures: The National Policy Framework for Children and Young People, 2014-2020
2. Comprehensive Employment Strategy for People with Disabilities 2015-2024
3. DCEDIY School Inclusion Model
4. Making Innovation Real - the Public Service Innovation Strategy
8. National LGBTI+ Youth Strategy 2018-2020
9. National Strategy on Children and Young People’s Participation in Decision-Making 2015-2020
10. National Strategy for Women and Girls 2017-2020*
11. National Traveller and Roma Inclusion Strategy 2017-2021*
12. National Youth Strategy 2015-2020
13. One World, One Future: Ireland’s Policy for International Development
14. Our Public Service 2020
15. Public Sector Duty
16. The Global Island: Ireland’s Foreign Policy for a Changing World
17. The Migrant Integration Strategy 2017-2020*
18. The National Action Plan for Social Inclusion 2018-2021*
19. The Quality Customer Services Initiative*
20. First Five: A Whole-of-Government Strategy for Babies, Young Children and their Families 2019-2028
21. Wellbeing Policy Statement and Framework for Practice 2018-2023
Bodies under the Aegis of the Department of Health
1. Dental Council
2. Food Safety Authority of Ireland
3. Health and Social Care Professionals Council (CORU)
4. Health Information and Quality Authority
5. Health Insurance Authority
6. Health Products Regulatory Authority
7. Health Research Board
8. Health Service Executive (HSE)
9. Irish Blood Transfusion Service
10. Medical Council
11. Mental Health Commission
12. National Cancer Registry Ireland
13. National Paediatric Hospital Development Board
14. National Treatment Purchase Fund
15. Nursing and Midwifery Board of Ireland
16. Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland
17. Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Council
19. Voluntary Health Insurance Board
Health Service Executive Annual Report
Our Health Service
Our Corporate Plan
Our Population
Governance and Our Organisation
Listening to Our Service Users
Reform and Transformation
Clinical, Quality and Patient Safety
Safeguarding and Protection
Service Delivery
Operational Performance
Population Health and Wellbeing
Community Healthcare
Mental Health Services
Disability Services
Older Persons’ Services
Palliative Care Services
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Services Acute Hospital Services
Cancer Services
Women and Children’s Services
National Ambulance Service
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Appendices
Appendix 1: Membership of the Senior Leadership Team
Appendix 2: Organisational Structure
Appendix 3: Performance against NSP 2019 Key Performance Indicators and Volume Activity
Appendix 4: Capital Infrastructure
Appendix 5: Annual Energy Efficiency Report
Financial Governance
Operating and Financial Overview 2019
Governance Statement and Board Members’ Report
Statement on Internal Control
Comptroller and Auditor General Report for Presentation to the Houses of the Oireachtas
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
The last 12 months have seen progressive change in a number of areas across the HSE, from service developments which are enhancing the experience of patients, to new ways of working which are changing the way services are delivered.
During the year, Ireland: Country Health Profile 2019, State of Health in the EU reported Ireland as having the fastest improving life expectancy in the EU driven by survival rates from conditions such as heart disease, stroke and cancer.
The same report stated that Ireland has the highest share of the population that reports being in good health in the EU.
These are important measures of general population health and mean that with its partners the HSE is achieving success in helping people to maintain good health and access effective healthcare services when illness arises.
Progress also continues with the reform and modernisation of services including work on the introduction of major trauma centres and trauma units, further development of clinical networks for specialist services, and the introduction of new community-based care delivery models.
As Chairperson of the Board, I and my colleagues on the Board are pleased to submit the first Annual Report and Financial Statements prepared since the re-establishment of a Board for the Health Service Executive (HSE) in June 2019.
As we submit this Annual Report and Financial Statements, COVID-19 has changed the focus of all healthcare systems around the world, including our own.
The scale of the current challenge facing the Irish health system from COVID-19 and the associated HSE response is unprecedented.
Our Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and everyone working within the HSE have redirected their focus and attention to managing this pandemic to ensure that lives are saved and overall health is protected.
Colleagues are working hour-by-hour to continually support public health, hospitals, the community, nursing homes, the National Ambulance Service and other essential functions as we all strive to manage the COVID-19 pandemic.
On behalf of the Board, I am extremely grateful for the dedication and extraordinary commitment of every member of staff for all that is being done during this unprecedented and difficult time.
That thanks extends to General Practitioners (GPs), pharmacists and other community based workers as well as to everyone working in our partner organisations and our stakeholders.
Healthcare workers, from the doctor or nurse in the front line to the procurement expert or tech support colleague, all have mobilised quickly to protect our country and our people from the virus.
They are to be admired and commended.
Recent increases in the HSE’s annual budget allocation have helped the HSE to make significant improvements in many areas and we are grateful for those increases.
As a Board we are pleased with the improved financial control within the HSE.
Financial control and predictability are a requirement for effective planning of operational capacity and future investment.
I again thank colleagues for helping us make rapid progress in this area, progress which will pay back in stakeholder confidence and will set us up well to open discussions on future funding through a long-term multi-year settlement.
Whilst these and many other improvements should be welcomed we know that we have much more to do.
The demand for health services is exceeding available capacity and unmet need is accumulating, often expressed in significant waiting lists in both hospitals and the community and through increased demand for emergency care.
The past year was also challenging for the health service as a result of issues which arose from the audit process in CervicalCheck and the publication of the MacCraith report into the delays in issuing cervical screening human papillomavirus (HPV) retest results to a large cohort of women and their GPs.
As a Board we are determined to increase service capacity to reduce waiting times.
We are equally determined to avoid failures in services we provide which cause distress to those who are supposed to benefit from them and to the staff who administer them.
Both groups deserve better.
Listening to what matters to our patients is fundamental in shaping the way we deliver services.
During 2019, a number of areas were progressed to promote patient and service user involvement across our health service in order to hear the views of stakeholders who have day-to-day experiences of the health services and to gain an understanding of what they see as the priorities for the future.
Service improvement is best achieved when the voice of the patient, the clinician and the service manager are simultaneously engaged in improving outcomes.
We hope to see further progress in this area though the current year.
As the Board, I and my colleagues are in a position of significant trust, privilege and responsibility in working with staff across the HSE in improving how the organisation is run, how it delivers services, and how it plans for the future provision of health and social care services.
I am very optimistic for the years ahead and we will collectively strive to provide the health service that our population deserves.
With an increasing population who are living longer, it is crucial that the health services effectively plan for future healthcare needs.
New ways of working and delivering services bring great opportunities and ensure that future healthcare in Ireland remains of the highest quality, with the patient placed at the heart of all we do.
As part of the response to COVID-19, a range of significant and essential changes has been put in place by the HSE and this provides an opportunity to identify changes which should be retained in the future.
Doing so will ensure that we capitalise on the gains that have been made during the crisis, minimising long-term impacts for patients and staff while maximising value for the taxpayer.
The implementation of the long-term policy direction set out in Sláintecare will continue to be a key focus for us in 2020 and beyond.
Finally, I would like to thank sincerely all the Board members who served during the year for their commitment and valued contribution.
I would also like to thank the Minister for Health, his officials, our Board Committees, and our CEO, Paul Reid, his management team and all colleagues.
We have had an eventful first year.
I look forward to continued collaboration and to working with the new Government in 2020.
The year ahead promises to be a year of change and challenge and we look forward to both.
Chairperson, Health Service Executive Board
Ireland has many attributes on which to build a world-leading health system.
In the Board’s first year, we have been hugely impressed by the skill, commitment and expertise of the clinicians, support staff and managers of the HSE.
This is also the case for the equally dedicated staff of our partner organisations with whom we share the challenges of providing high quality care under tight financial control.
As a Board we see significant strengths in these attributes which will drive a high performing health and social care service of which we can all be rightly proud.
Through innovation, service development, new ways of working and thinking we have seen much positive change and remain committed to further improving the health and experience of our patients.
Introduction from the Chief Executive Officer
Our workforce is committed, and most have a strong vocation to public healthcare and to the public service.
It is my privilege as CEO to publish the 2019 Annual Report and Financial Statements for the HSE.
While we have seen many challenges in 2019, we are at this moment in the throes of defending our population against the COVID-19 global pandemic.
Our services are facing unprecedented pressures which have necessitated the coming together of the whole of our health system; public, private and not-for-profit.
Every service, every worker, and indeed every person and household has stepped up to the plate to support the national effort.
Our health system has shown an agility and a resilience that many of us did not believe was possible.
As CEO I hope to support our staff to continue to give the best of themselves, to be proud of their efforts and to be working for the HSE, and to sustain the confidence of the public, which has been so very important in sustaining all of us this far.
At year end the budget is under control.
The financial implications of COVID-19 will also be immense.
I take this opportunity to express my sincere sympathies.
The key priority for the HSE during 2019 was to maximise the provision of safe services to the people we serve, and to finally get a grip on the health budget.
Chief Executive Officer
Priorities in 2019
The delivery of quality and safe services
Transitioning to a new model of integrated care
Strengthening the confidence and trust in the organisation.
Our changing population
There is increasing pressure placed on our services as a result of population growth, an increasing incidence of chronic diseases and an ageing population.
Life expectancy is above the EU average with women living to, on average, 84 years and men to 80.4 years.
The three most common chronic diseases in Ireland are cancer, cardiovascular disease and respiratory disease.
Chronic disease increases with age.
The population in 2019 grew by an estimated 3.8% since the 2016 Census.
This was across all age groups with the most significant growth seen in the older age groups.
The number of people aged 65 years and over has increased by 35.2% since 2009 (considerably higher than the EU average of 16.5%).
It is projected that the number of those over 65 years will increase by a further 15% in 2021.
This continuing growth is due mainly to medical innovations, enhanced treatments and improved lifestyles.
There are many positive trends visible within the health service: life expectancy is increasing, mortality rates are declining and survival rates from conditions such as heart disease, stroke and cancer are improving.
The experience of patients receiving care is generally good, with 84% of patients having a good/very good inpatient experience as indicated by the National Patient Experience Survey.
Progress has also been made in recent years in improving hospital productivity and efficiency, increasing proportion of appropriate procedures carried out as day case, and improving day of surgery admission rates.
But there is still room for improvement, particularly in relation to the length of time patients are having to wait to access particular services.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) report Ireland: Country Health Profile 2019 provides an overview of health and the health system in Ireland.
The OECD report highlighted that our health expenditure per capita is above the EU average; public health and healthcare in Ireland are comparatively effective; the use of both primary care and inpatient care is lower in Ireland than the EU average; Ireland has a lower number of doctors but a relatively high number of nurses;
Introduction from the Chief Executive Officer
During 2019, the new Board of the HSE came into operation under the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019.
In conjunction with the Board I worked to ensure that the patient, service user and the public are at the core of our thinking and planning, that we value and support all healthcare staff, including those who work in not-for-profit, that we are structured in a way which supports frontline services, and that our financial and operational management is strengthened.
I set out three immediate priorities for the organisation:
long waiting times remain a substantial problem in Ireland;
eHealth solutions will be an important element in the future service delivery model;
more efficient use of hospital resources can be achieved;
budget management remains an issue at all healthcare levels;
far-reaching changes are required to make the Irish health system sustainable.
What is evident from the OECD Report is that we have no choice but to pursue ambitious reform plans in order to make the best use of current resources.
These areas are being addressed in our National Service Plan (NSP) for 2020 linked to Sláintecare.
Strengthening management capacity
In 2019, the former Directorate structure within the HSE was replaced with an Executive Management Team (EMT) in July which meets fortnightly.
A Senior Leadership Team, comprising the EMT, National Directors, Hospital Group CEOs and Chief Officers of Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs) has also been established and this group meets every second month.
Prior to the establishment of the HSE Board, the Department of Health (DoH) exercised direct oversight over the HSE’s performance.
However, the establishment of the Board necessitated a reconsideration of how the HSE and the DoH engage with one another around performance and related matters.
With the direct involvement of the Performance and Delivery Committee of the Board, a new engagement model with the DoH has been agreed.
This model recognises the DoH’s role as vote holder and the accountability that comes with that responsibility, while at the same time recognising that the Board is now the HSE’s governing body.
Since coming into office, I have come to appreciate just how essential it is that the HSE’s corporate structure and its administration becomes more outward looking and that we fully commit ourselves to supporting the people who staff our hospitals and provide care in the community.
A ‘review of the centre’ is currently underway.
Its initial focus is on the current organisation, its functions, structures and ways of working.
This will inform the future design, ensuring design robustness and consideration of all components, as well as informing the impact assessment required for implementation.
Reform
I committed to working to make Sláintecare a reality and it has been a key focus of our service planning for 2020.
(We have deployed many of the Sláintecare principles in how we have organised our response to COVID-19).
I have engaged extensively with the DoH and with the Sláintecare Programme Implementation Office (SPIO)
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Introduction from the Chief Executive Officer
Improving capacity and access. Supporting the early implementation of Sláintecare, a €20m Sláintecare Integration Fund was established in 2019 to test and scale how services can best be delivered.
I have been working closely with the SPIO to support, monitor and evaluate the range of HSE projects and supports that have received funding.
Operational Performance
The NSP 2019 set out priorities and actions for the organisation by service area, together with targets against key performance indicators and expected levels of activity for 2019.
It includes detailed financial and Human Resources (HR) data together with a schedule of intended capital projects for 2019.
The Service Plan was supported by detailed business plans and operational plans identifying named responsible people for its delivery.
The National Performance Oversight Group review performance against the NSP.
The NSP 2019 has over 125 priorities with 555 supporting actions across all areas of service delivery and enabling functions.
80% of those actions were on schedule to be delivered (26% completed; 54% on track to be completed to the timeline set out in the NSP), almost 20% delayed and 1% not progressed.
Updates on many priorities and actions are included in this Annual Report.
Those delayed or not progressed are mainly due to resourcing issues, capacity constraints, dependencies on external stakeholders or factors outside the direct control of the action owner.
These however impact on our ability to meet our key performance indicator targets or planned activity levels.
Included within the service delivery chapter of this Annual Report, is a high level overview on the key performance indicators and activity data in 2019 against 2018 across community healthcare and acute services.
The full suite of data is included in Appendix 3.
During the year Professor Brian MacCraith conducted an independent and rapid review of delays in issuing cervical screening human papillomavirus (HPV) retest results to a large cohort of women and their GPs.
Professor MacCraith was asked to examine the series of events within the CervicalCheck programme that occurred following the delays and this report was presented to me in August.
While much work and many improvements have taken place in the CervicalCheck service, it is unacceptable that women should have to wait so long for important information about their health.
The HSE accepted entirely the findings of the MacCraith Review and committed to a careful and expeditious implementation in full of each of the
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019 recommendations.
Improving financial management
On my first day as CEO I committed myself to improving financial reporting and controls.
This continues to be a difficult message to deliver, especially when it is clear that many services are under pressure.
However, managing the balance between providing access to high quality care and remaining within budget, is a key aspect of the role of health managers.
During 2019, we continued our intensive focus on financial management and financial planning.
Senior managers across the organisation were actively engaged regarding activity and expenditure and the related challenges of operating within available resources.
Financial management meetings chaired jointly by myself and the Chief Financial Officer, are now a regular feature of our performance management processes and take place on a monthly basis.
Senior budget holders give account of their financial performance against service plan objectives and give an informed view of predicted outturn by end of year.
A new Integrated Financial Management System is being progressed.
Myself and the EMT are working with the Board to ensure good governance, including rigorous and meaningful risk oversight, and assurance as to the appropriate use of public money.
Developing our Corporate Plan
We are developing a new vision for our health services which will support implementation of Sláintecare and address our key priorities and goals for the next number of years.
An extensive Engagement and Consultation Programme with almost 12,000 external and internal stakeholders has now been completed, the findings of which will inform how we plan and deliver our services over the coming years.
Notwithstanding the considerable work undertaken to date, it has not been possible to conclude the Corporate Plan process by the intended timeline of end of March 2020, given the need for staff at all levels, from across the organisation, to focus on preparations for and responses to the COVID-19 emergency.
The Corporate Plan will be finalised later in 2020.
Brexit
The United Kingdom (UK) left the EU on 31 January 2020 and has entered a transition period until 31 December 2020.
The HSE had already put a comprehensive package of measures in place in 2019 to mitigate against the risk of a ‘no-deal’ Brexit.
These preparations are continuing into 2020 and we will continue to work with the DoH and partner agencies to prepare for the end of the transition period and the new deadline date of end-December 2020.
In conclusion, I would like to thank once again all staff working in the HSE, across community, hospital and national services.
I would also like to acknowledge the support and commitment of my colleagues on the EMT and Senior Leadership Team.
I would like to pay tribute to the Board and to the Chairperson, the Board Committees, to the Minister for Health and to those working within the DoH.
I am conscious that 2020 has and will yet prove to be an extremely difficult year; particularly for families who have lost loved ones due to COVID-19.
As CEO I am immensely proud of the innovation we have shown in response to the current crisis.
Many of the measures we have taken as individuals and as an organisation clearly have the potential to transform the HSE permanently, and for the better.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Our Corporate Plan
Under the Health Act 2004 (as amended), the HSE is required to submit a Corporate Plan every three years, specifying the key objectives of the HSE for the period concerned.
The last formal Corporate Plan developed was for the period 2015-2017.
In 2018, in anticipation of the publication of Sláintecare and its strategic implications, it was agreed with the DoH to extend the 2015-2017 Corporate Plan by refreshing it to incorporate additional developments arising in 2018.
Recognising the establishment of the new HSE Board and the appointment of a new CEO and other governance arrangements covered in legislation, another refresh was completed in 2019.
The development of a new Corporate Plan commenced in quarter three of 2019 under the guidance and direction of the HSE’s EMT, the Performance and Delivery Committee of the Board and the Board itself.
A Project Team was established and a detailed Project Plan and Consultation Plan were developed.
It is intended that the Corporate Plan will be published later in 2020.
It will have a five-year focus, be aligned with Sláintecare and will focus on providing a clear medium-term roadmap for staff, patients, service users and all stakeholders. Developing the Corporate Plan
A number of steps were taken to examine the evidence base, policy environment and views of key stakeholders in determining an initial set of corporate priorities for consultation.
Initial insight and information gathering tasks provided an analysis of the health service from many perspectives.
These tasks included:
1. Completion of four Rapid Reviews which focused on:
i. Corporate Plans of relevant and comparable international health systems
ii. Existing strategies of the Irish health system
iii. Existing data relating to the views of citizens, staff and the people who use our services
iv. Population health and wellbeing profile of people living in Ireland
2. A Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threat (SWOT) analysis
3. A Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental and Legal (PESTEL) analysis.
Our Consultation Process
A critical component of the process to develop the Corporate Plan is relevant and broad consultation with a wide range of stakeholders and interested parties ensuring the voices of as broad a range of stakeholders as possible are brought to bear on the content of the Corporate Plan.
This has been done through the following channels:
Face-to-Face Consultation Meetings: open and broad ranging meetings focused on individuals and groups with particular interest in the strategic priorities and goals of the HSE
Workshops: involving both internal and external stakeholders
Community Panel: a panel established by the HSE providing early stage feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of the health service
Written Submissions: from key stakeholder organisations across all key sectors – unions, statutory, government, HSE funded agencies, community and voluntary groups and professional bodies
On-line Open Survey: targeting both the public and staff
Omnibus Survey: targeting a nationally representative sample of 1,000 people
Regional Listening Meetings: targeting regional staff, community-based/support groups and members of the public.
Outputs from the each of the consultations will be analysed and key findings identified for consideration by the HSE Board in the preparation of the Corporate Plan.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Our Population
The population in 2019 has grown by an estimated 3.8% since the 2016 Census.
The population is growing across all regions and age groups, with the most significant growth seen in the older age groups.
Assuming moderate changes in migration and fertility rates, the total population is projected to reach some 5.7m by 2039 with more than one in five people expected to be aged 65 years or over.
Notwithstanding this growth in the older population, in 2016 a quarter of our population are children aged 0-17 years, which is high by EU comparisons.
Ageing population
The greatest change in population structure over the last 10 years is the growth in both the proportion and the number of people aged 65 years and over.
The number of people aged 65 years and over has increased by 35.2% since 2009, which is considerably higher than the EU average of 16.5% over the same period.
It is projected that the number of people aged 65 years and over will increase by a further 23,200 (14.9%) by 2021.
Similarly, the number of adults aged 85 years and over will increase by some 3,600 (4.5%) by 2021.
This continuing growth is due mainly to medical innovations, enhanced treatments and improved lifestyles.
Birth rates
There were 61,200 births in 2019, 184 more births when compared with the same period in 2018.
Births and birth rate have reduced in recent years and are projected to continue to reduce in the next decade.
The fertility rate has continued to decrease (1.75% in 2018) and is now at its lowest in the last decade; however, Ireland still has the third highest fertility rate in the EU behind France and Sweden.
Our Population
Over 4.9m people live in Ireland (Central Statistics Office (CSO), 2019).
The population has increased by 64,500 from April 2018 to April 2019, following a similar increase in 2017/2018, and these are the largest annual increases since 2008.
Greatest gains in life expectancy achieved in older age groups, reflecting decreasing mortality rates from major diseases
Mortality rates declined over past decade – mortality rates from circulatory system diseases decreased by 25.1%, respiratory death rates by 10.5% and cancer death rates by 10%
Life expectancy and health of the population
Life expectancy in Ireland has increased by 3.1 years for males and by almost two years for females since 2007 and is now above the EU average with women living to, on average, 84 years and men to 80.4 years.
The greatest gains in life expectancy have been achieved in the older age groups reflecting decreasing mortality rates from major diseases.
However life expectancy is socially patterned and is lower among unskilled workers compared to professional workers.
Studies have shown that certain groups have lower life expectancy such as Travellers and people who are homeless.
Suicide rates have fallen by 37.8% between 2009 and 2018 – However both self-harm presentations to hospital and suicide in the 15-19 age range are both above European norms
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Overall, age-standardised mortality rates have declined over the past decade; mortality rates from circulatory system diseases decreased by 25.1% between 2009 and 2018 and respiratory death rates and cancer death rates have decreased by 10.5% and 10% respectively over the same period.
Transport accident mortality rates have also fallen by 49.7% in the past decade.
Suicide rates have fallen by 37.8% between 2009 and 2018 and the rate in 2016 was 8.5 per 100,000, placing Ireland below the EU average for both men and women.
However, both self-harm presentations to hospital and suicide in the 15-19 age cohort are above European norms.
The infant mortality rate in 2019 was 3.3 per 1,000 live births and remains low by EU comparisons.
The average maternal age for all births registered in 2019 was 31.3 years, with teenage births reducing to 980 births in 2018 from 1,041 births in 2017 and 1,098 in 2016.
In recent years age-adjusted cancer incidence in Ireland is slowly declining for males and is stable for women – however the absolute number of cancer diagnoses is expected to approximately double to 43,000 by 2045 due to population growth and ageing
Lifestyle risk factors
In 2019, 14% of adults in Ireland smoked tobacco every day, down from 27% in 2002, and now slightly below the EU average.
Nearly one third of adults reported regular heavy alcohol intake in 2014, a rate well above the EU average.
The obesity rate increased to 18% in 2015, up from 15% in 2007, and is now higher than the EU average.
Chronic disease
The three most common chronic diseases in Ireland are cancer, cardiovascular disease and respiratory disease.
These diseases give rise to three quarters of deaths in Ireland.
It is estimated that over 1.07m people over the age of 18 years currently have one or more chronic diseases.
As chronic disease increases with age, the highest prevalence is observed in the population aged 50 years and over.
The number of people in this age cohort, living with one or more chronic disease, is estimated to increase by 40% from 2016 levels, to 1.1m in 2030.
In recent years age-adjusted cancer incidence in Ireland is slowly declining for males and is stable for women.
Given population growth and ageing, if future populations have the same risk of being diagnosed with cancer as currently, the number of cancers (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) would be expected to more than double in men and to almost double in women by 2045 (to 43,000 cases in total).
The burden of dementia is also projected to increase, from some 55,000 people in 2016 to over 150,000 people in 2046, almost a three-fold increase (The Irish National Dementia Strategy 2014).
The most common newly diagnosed cancers in Ireland for the years 2013-2015 were for men: prostate, colorectal and lung and for women: breast, lung and colorectal.
The next most common new cancer for both genders is melanoma
Ethnic and minority groups within our population include Travellers (30,987, CSO, 2016), asylum seekers (5,660 pending applications, Irish Refugee Council, 2018) and those who are homeless (6,696 adults and 3,752 children, Department of Housing Planning and Local Government, November 2019).
The estimated Roma population is between 4,000 and 5,000.
Marginalised groups Socially excluded groups have complex health needs and experience very poor health outcomes across a range of indicators such as chronic disease, morbidity, mortality and self-reported health.
These populations require greater support across a range of healthcare areas.
These statistics and trends provide us with an understanding of the demographic change and the challenges we face which have implications for future planning and health service delivery.
The burden of dementia is projected to increase from some 55,000 people in 2016 to over 150,000 people in 2046, almost a three-fold increase
This Annual Report describes what was accomplished in 2019 to meet the priorities set out in our National Service Plan 2019.
In meeting our legislative requirements under the Health Act 2004 (as amended), this Annual Report also reports progress against our Capital Plans and provides detailed financial statements for the organisation.
Governance
This is the first Annual Report prepared by the HSE since the re-establishment of a non-executive external Board for the organisation under the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019 which commenced on 28 June 2019.
During the period 1 January to 27 June the HSE Directorate was the governing body of the HSE under the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013, with the Director General accountable to the Minister for Health.
Since 28 June, the Board is the governing body of the HSE and is accountable to the Minister for Health for the performance of its functions.
The CEO is in turn accountable to and reports to the Board and is responsible for managing and controlling generally the administration and business of the HSE.
The HSE exercises a wide range of statutory functions which may have significant implications both for individuals and for the public generally.
Under the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act of 2019, the Minister for Health can issue directions to the HSE on the implementation of Ministerial and government policies and objectives, and determine priorities to which the HSE must have regard in preparing its Service Plan.
The HSE must comply with directions issued by the Minister for Health.
In line with the implementation of the recommendations of Sláintecare with regard to governance, the establishment of an independent Board was an important step in modernising and strengthening governance arrangements and sustaining reform.
Member of Board of NHS England from 2012-2015 and was also Chief Executive of the UK health charity, Macmillan Cancer Support.
Professor of Law at University College Cork (UCC) specialising in healthcare law and ethics.
Chaired the Commission on Patient Safety and Quality Assurance and has extensive experience of healthcare and professional regulation.
Retired CEO of Barnardos.
Former Government and political adviser.
Chairperson of Dolphin House Regeneration Board and Member of the Charities Regulatory Authority.
Lifelong disability activist.
Retired Family Physician.
Recognised as a leading figure in the development of Family Medicine in Ireland, working as a Trainer, then as Assistant Director of the TCD/HSE training programme, and as Director of the programme for 18 years.
Past President of the Irish College of General Practitioners (ICGP) and member of the Governing Board of ICGP from 2014 to 2017.
Founded the first Out of Hours GP co-op services in Ireland and was the recipient of the Fiona Bradley Award, recognising his commitment to serving Dublin’s vulnerable and deprived communities.
Currently chairs Mental Health Ireland and lectures on governance at the Irish Management Institute.
Chartered Director and held role of Chairperson of the Audit, Risk and Compliance Committee of the Irish Blood Transfusion Service.
In accordance with the Health Act 2004 (as amended) the Board has the following key functions:
1. It is the governing body of the Executive with authority, in the name of the Executive, to perform the functions of the Executive.
(a) performance of its functions
(b) achieving its objectives in accordance with the corporate plan
(iii) to enable compliance with the policies (whether set out in codes, guidelines or other documents, or any combination thereof) of the Government or a Minister of the Government to the extent that those policies may affect or relate to the functions of the Executive.
3. It is required to establish and implement arrangements for the management of the performance of the CEO.
The Board is accountable to the Minister for the performance of its functions above and shall inform the Minister in writing of any matter that it considers requires the Minister’s attention.
Under the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (2016), the Board is collectively responsible for leading and directing HSE activities within a framework of prudent and effective controls which enables risk to be assessed and managed.
The Board is required to act on a fully informed and ethical basis, in good faith, with due diligence and care, and in the best interest of the State body, having due regard to its legal responsibilities and the objectives set by Government.
The legislation recognises that neither the Board nor the CEO could exercise all of these functions personally and provides for a formal system of delegation under sections 16C and 16H of the Health Act 2004 (as amended).
This Delegations Policy Framework sets out the framework and supporting policy guidelines that underpin good governance regarding the system of delegation of statutory functions throughout the HSE.
This allows these functions to be undertaken on an operational basis through the Executive Management Team and Senior Leadership Team and their supporting structures within the organisation.
Committees
The Board has established four Committees in order to provide it with assistance and advice in relation to the performance of its functions.
Three of the Board’s Committees act in an advisory capacity and have no executive function.
The Audit and Risk Committee has a number of specific functions, and those pertaining to audit have a legislative basis.
The Board’s Committees are:
Audit and Risk Committee
People and Culture Committee
Performance and Delivery Committee
Safety and Quality Committee.
Functions of the Committees
The Audit and Risk Committee is established and maintained in accordance with section 40H of the Health Act 2004 (as amended) by section 23 of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019.
The legislation recognises that the Audit Committee has a role to provide oversight and advice on risk management.
Therefore, its title has been expanded to the ‘Audit and Risk Committee’ to reflect the full nature of its remit.
Legislation obliges membership of the Committee to comprise no fewer than three Board members and not fewer than four other persons who, in the opinion of the Board, have the relevant skills and experience to perform the functions of the committee, at least one of whom shall hold a professional qualification in accountancy or auditing.
Under current legislation the Committee is required to:
Advise the Board and the CEO on financial matters relating to its function
The functions of the Audit and Risk Committee include a range of financial, statutory, compliance and governance matters as set out in legislation.
People and Culture Committee
The role of the People and Culture Committee is to enhance the environment that supports and values the staff of the health service in order to engage the talent and nurture the leadership capability of individuals and teams working together to drive the desired culture throughout the health service to deliver safer better healthcare.
In pursuit of its role, the Committee will provide strategic oversight of and advice on matters to support the ambition of the People Strategy 2019-2024 to have the right people, with the right skills, in the right place and at the right time.
The Committee is not responsible for any executive functions and is not vested with any executive powers.
In relation to its duties and functions, it fulfils an advisory and support role only.
Governance and Our Organisation
The Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019 provides for the establishment of an Audit Committee and any other Committees that the Board deem as necessary for the purpose of providing assistance and advice in relation to the performance of the Board’s functions. Safety and Quality Committee
The scope of the Committee’s authority extends to all aspects of safety and quality within the public health service.
The Committee is not responsible for any executive functions and is not vested with any executive powers.
In relation to its duties and functions, it fulfils an advisory and support role only. The Chairperson of the National Independent Review Panel reports to the Committee Chairperson.
Under the Health Act 2004 (as amended), the HSE is required to develop a Code of Governance to set out the principles and practices associated with good governance.
The current Code was issued in 2015 and during the year work commenced on a revised Code of Governance to be finalised in 2020.
The Statement on Internal Control in Part II Financial Governance of this Annual Report reflects our compliance with the requirements of the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (2016).
The Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019 strengthens independent oversight and performance of the HSE.
The establishment of the Board is an important step in improving governance arrangements and is a priority in the implementation of Sláintecare.
The Chairperson and the Board are working closely with the CEO and EMT to ensure the organisation works effectively as well as responding efficiently and productively to a range of new governance requirements stemming from these new arrangements.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Membership of the Executive Management Team [as at 31 December 2019] Governance and Our Organisation
Chief Executive Officer
Paul Reid was appointed Chief Executive Officer of the HSE on 14 May 2019.
He was CEO of Fingal County Council immediately prior to his appointment and, in previous roles has led large organisations in the private, not-for-profit, central and local government sectors.
He has held senior executive roles previously in the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, Trócaire and eir.
He holds a Masters Degree in Business Administration from Trinity College Dublin and a BA in Human Resources and Industrial Relations from the National College of Ireland.
Chief Operations Officer
Anne O’Connor is the Chief Operations Officer of the HSE.
She leads in excess of 100,000 staff members who deliver health services across community and hospital settings in Ireland.
She has led health services in Ireland at local and national level.
She is trained as and has worked as an Occupational Therapist.
Stephen Mulvany is the Chief Financial Officer of the HSE with extensive experience in financial planning, operational planning and service delivery.
He is a Chartered Accountant (FCCA) with a Post Graduate Diploma in Information Technology for Managers and in 2018 completed the MSc in Management Practice.
He has also completed the Institute of Directors Certificate and Diploma in Company Direction.
Chief Clinical Officer
Dr Colm Henry is the Chief Clinical Officer (CCO) of the HSE with responsibility for ensuring that clinical leadership is represented at the most senior level of the HSE.
Prior to his appointment as CCO, he was National Clinical Advisor and Group Lead for Acute Hospitals in the HSE and, before this, was the National Lead for the Clinical Director Programme in the HSE.
He was appointed as consultant geriatrician to the Mercy University Hospital in Cork in 2002 and was the hospital’s Clinical Director from 2009 to 2012.
Chief Strategy Officer
Dean Sullivan is the Chief Strategy Officer of the HSE, leading the HSE’s strategy development, planning and reform process across the health and social care system.
He has 30 years’ experience in the public and private sectors, including senior roles in the Northern Ireland Health and Social Care Board and DoH, and with PA Consulting and Price Waterhouse.
He is a qualified accountant (CIPFA) and has also completed the Institute of Directors Certificate and Diploma in Company Direction.
National Director, Human Resources Anne Marie Hoey is the National Director of Human Resources for the HSE.
She has over 30 years’ experience in the Irish health service, holding a number of senior management roles, including leading a change programme across a number of units within the Primary Care Reimbursement Service.
Her focus includes strategic and operational management, change management and people management.
Chief Information Officer
Fran Thompson is Chief Information Officer of the HSE and CEO of eHealth Ireland enabling the digital transformation of Ireland’s health service.
With over 25 years’ health ICT leadership experience, through both roles, he is particularly focussed on maximising digital transformation within the health sector.
National Director, Communications
Dr Paul Connors is National Director of Communications for the HSE.
He leads a team of approximately 60 communications professionals who co-ordinate and manage a wide range of communications output for the organisation.
He completed a primary degree in Business in University College, Galway.
This was followed by a Masters in Communications from Dublin City University.
He completed a PhD in Strategic Major Emergency Communications in 2009 and has also been called to the Bar. Governance and Our Organisation Mr Fran Thompson
National Director, Internal Audit Dr Geraldine Smith is National Director of Internal Audit for the HSE.
She also chairs the Audit Committee of a central government department.
Her experience includes working as Assistant National Director of Internal Audit with the HSE, Director of Audit with the Eastern Regional Health Authority and Senior Auditor with the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General.
She is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants and a Chartered Internal Auditor and has a PhD in Governance and a Masters in Public Management.
She also has a Professional Diploma in Corporate Governance from UCD Smurfit Business School.
Head of Corporate Affairs
John Kelly is Head of Corporate Affairs for the HSE.
He is a qualified solicitor and has worked for one of the largest law firms in the country where he specialised in public administrative law, employment law, and healthcare law.
Prior to training as a solicitor he worked as a senior healthcare manager.
Risk Management
Delivering quality and safe services for patients, service users and the public, is our overriding priority.
Real and meaningful partnerships between patients and those working at all levels of the health service generate a shared vision for a compassionate health service, one that learns when things go wrong, responds accordingly and reduces harm to those who entrust their lives and care to us.
Risks to the delivery of healthcare will ultimately impact on patients and those who use our services and it is this that guides our overall approach to the management of risk described below.
1. Risk Management in the HSE
The HSE is the largest public sector organisation in Ireland accounting for approximately one-third of all public expenditure, employing one-third of the public sector workforce and with one-third of the population accessing its services each year.
Effective risk management is an essential element of good corporate governance as it assists in determining priorities and setting objectives, analysing uncertainties within decision-making arrangements, clarifying accountabilities and demonstrating that the public interest is best served.
It is the policy of the HSE to manage risk on an integrated basis.
This means it is inclusive of all risk whether to do with management or service delivery processes.
It involves anticipating risks that threaten the achievement of objectives and putting in place actions that, as far as possible, reduce risks to an acceptable level.
2. Risk Management Roles and Responsibilities
Governance and Our Organisation
The Board has collective responsibility for leading and directing the HSE’s activities including the oversight of the Integrated Risk Management Policy, the approval of the risk management framework and monitoring of its effectiveness.
Audit and Risk Committee and other Committees of the Board
The Audit and Risk Committee on behalf of the Board provides overall oversight and advice on the operation of the HSE’s Risk Management Policy and related activities within the function of risk management.
The Audit and Risk Committee works closely with other Board Committees in fulfilling this oversight function.
Executive Responsibilities
Whereas every staff member is responsible for identifying, notifying and managing risk within the context of their work, risk management is a line management responsibility.
The HSE’s Integrated Risk Management Policy outlines the roles and responsibilities for managing risk.
The Policy and its associated processes apply throughout the HSE and HSE-funded agencies.
The Policy requires each national team to clearly outline the governance arrangements for risk management, including the process for the notification of risk and the escalation of actions to the next level in the accountability structure.
National community and acute operations teams have arrangements in place to oversee how risk is managed and monitored across CHOs, Hospital Groups, and in the National Ambulance Service.
Other national functions have arrangements in place to oversee how risk is managed and monitored within their areas of responsibility (e.g.
Chief Financial Officer, National Human Resources, Chief Information Officer, Health Business Services (HBS), Internal Audit, National Screening Service, etc).
For HSE funded services, requirements for managing and monitoring risk are set out in the relevant service agreements between the HSE and individual agencies. 3. Review of Organisational Approach to Risk Management
Changes in 2019 to the HSE’s organisational structure at a corporate level together with the appointment of the HSE Board were key drivers in relation to the decision by the HSE to conduct a review of risk management.
This decision also coincided with the publication of the Scoping Inquiry into the CervicalCheck Screening Programme 2018 which recommended that ‘the implementation of new governance arrangements for the HSE should include a substantial revision to the organisational approach to risk management and its reporting’.
The review of the HSE’s approach to risk management recognised that while significant progress had been achieved, challenges remained in implementing and embedding risk management in a manner that integrates both corporate and clinical governance across the health service.
The review report and its recommendations were accepted by the HSE Board at its September 2019 meeting.
The recommendations of the review included the need for the HSE to:
Adopt an Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) approach
Establish an ERM Programme
Appoint a dedicated Chief Risk Officer.
The introduction of an ERM approach represents a significant change, and a properly resourced and structured change process will be required to ensure its success.
The Board has ensured budget provision for the establishment of these new arrangements as part of the NSP 2020.
Implementation of the review recommendations has commenced with:
(i) A comprehensive review of the risks on the Corporate Risk Register by the CEO and EMT in October 2019 (see below), and (ii) The initiation of the process to recruit a Chief Risk Officer.
The implementation of the other recommendations set out in the review report will be progressed during 2020.
4. Corporate Risks
The Corporate Risk Register is a key organisational document that allows the Board and the EMT to review and assess the HSE’s response to risk.
As noted above, each of the risks on the Corporate Risk Register is assigned to one of the four committees of the Board.
It is these committees, with the relevant members of the Executive, which scrutinise the risks and associated action plans.
During 2019 the organisation took a number of actions to mitigate identified corporate risks.
In October 2019 the CEO commenced a process with the EMT to undertake a comprehensive review of all the risks on the Corporate Risk Register to ensure that the Register identified all of the most significant risks facing the organisation, together with associated mitigating actions.
For each risk, an assessment was made of both impact and likelihood to give an overall ‘risk score’.
This review process was substantially completed in 2019 and identified the following as the highest risks facing the organisation at that time:
Healthcare associated infections and antimicrobial resistance What drives the risk?
How are we managing the risk?
Healthcare associated infections (HCAIs) and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) can result in patients becoming sicker, placing additional demands on health service capacity in the case of AMR the longer term risks to the sustainability of healthcare services.
The ease with which microorganisms spread in healthcare settings both hospital and community.
Enhanced surveillance
Implementation of Ireland’s National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance 2017-2020 (iNAP) and 2019-2020 HSE Implementation Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance and Infection Control
National oversight of HCAI AMR Programme
Investment in additional infection prevention and control, surveillance and antimicrobial stewardship staff and communications
Governance and Our Organisation
Capacity and access demand
What is the risk?
What drives the risk?
How are we managing the risk?
Demographic pressures, high occupancy rates in acute hospital services and insufficient capacity across community and acute services can lead to a reduction in the quality of patient care and repeated failure to achieve standards of care.
Any sustained or exceptional level of demand for services, such as during the winter period can reduce the availability of services.
Providing additional acute hospital beds and homecare services as part of the Winter Plan
Recruitment of additional staff in community and hospital settings
Strengthening chronic disease management in the community
Working with the National Treatment Purchase Fund (NTPF) to provide additional capacity for planned and unplanned care in acute hospitals.
Medical and clinical workforce What is the risk?
Not having a sufficient number of critical staff in particular clinical staff, who have the required skills and professional qualifications, can impact on our ability to ensure safe and effective services.
A high reliance on agency staff and challenges recruiting and retaining medical, clinical and other critical workforce grades including the employment of consultants not on the specialist division register (SDR).
Establishment of Workforce Planning Unit
Developing new models of care
Review of current recruitment process
Workforce planning strategy and draft strategy Demand for Medical Consultants and Specialists to 2028
Additional HR support for key strategic workforce planning priorities
Clinical governance arrangements for non-SDR consultants.
Disability services
The way services for people with disabilities are currently organised and resourced can impact on our ability to ensure appropriate, safe and quality care.
Delays in moving to new models required to address increasing and changing need.
Residential placement committees now operate in each CHO to triage, and manage waiting lists and new referrals based on risk
The single assessment of need process was introduced to enable the residential placement process operate more efficiently and transparently
Commencing the operation of Children’s Disability Networks.
Capital infrastructure and critical equipment
Access to and the quality of health services is dependent on its built infrastructure and specialist equipment.
Inadequate built infrastructure and ageing critical clinical equipment, including ambulances.
Available capital funding has been prioritised to address infrastructural and clinical risk
Brexit may result in threats to the continuity for critical goods and services which ultimately could have an impact on patients and service users.
Uncertainty in relation to the final agreement between the UK and the EU.
HSE Brexit oversight group and steering group in place and meeting regularly
Planned preventive maintenance programmes are in place for all critical infrastructure and equipment.
Brexit
Risk assessments complete for each priority area and Brexit work plan in place
Service Provision Agreements signed with 21 UK Hospitals as a contingency measure for the current provision of services to Irish patients post Brexit
Additional warehouse storage capacity.
Other risks on the Corporate Risk Register are set out below:
Current configuration of hospitals
Cyber security
Managing change including culture change
Screening services
Organisational reputation
Policy and legislation development and implementation
Safety, health and wellbeing of staff
Individual performance management and accountability
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
140 Team Development/Team Intervention programmes were delivered around the country, facilitating some 1,500 participants.
619 one-to-one business coaching sessions were delivered internally to staff across the organisation.
Graduates on the 2018/2019 Gradlink programme completed their final continuous professional development module as part of the programme.
HSELanD (the HSE’s on-line learning portal) won two awards during the year:
The award for Best Use of Technology in People Management at the Chartered Institute for Personnel Development Ireland HR Awards.
HSELanD received this award in recognition of its use of technology to drive a change in culture through learning.
HSELanD also won the Brandon Hall Group Excellence Bronze Award for the Best Unique or Innovative Learning and Development programme for An Introduction to Children First.
128,715 individual health service users have completed at least one learning programme on HSELanD during 2019.
Diversity, Equality and Inclusion
A Diversity, Equality and Inclusion event for International Women’s Day in March was held for 200 colleagues in the Royal College of Physicians, as well as eight Women in Leadership events throughout the country. •
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Governance and Our Organisation
Employment Levels
The health service is the largest employer in the state with just under 120,000 whole time equivalents (WTEs) employed by the HSE and section 38 agencies, as at 31 December 2019.
Since 2018, overall staffing levels have increased by 1.7% or 1,960 WTEs.
All staff categories, except general support (-0.4%/38 WTEs) showed growth in 2019 compared with 2018.
The largest growth was seen in nursing and midwifery (+561 WTEs) followed by patient and client care (+427 WTEs).
Medical and dental staffing was the third highest staff category showing an increase, with an additional 390 WTEs, of which 154 WTEs were consultants.
Table 1: WTEs by staff category
99% compliance with 30-minute breaks
99% compliance with weekly/fortnightly rest or equivalent compensatory rest.
Pay and Staffing Strategy
The 2019 Pay and Staffing Strategy reflected the key learning from 2018, and began with a central high-level affordability assessment of the level of staff, on an average cost per WTE basis, that the budget for 2019 could support.
This approach, designed to enable more realistic and affordable forecasting, followed on from the WTE limits process implemented in late 2018.
Key stakeholders and budget holders then operationalised the WTE limits taking account of service priorities and maintenance of existing services, while identifying the opportunities for optimisation and efficiencies.
Significant progress was made on aligning our workforce with the associated funding in 2019 with further key learning from this first full year of implementation being used to further strengthen and inform the process for 2020.
Medical and dental
Nursing and midwifery
Data source: Health Service Personnel Census.
European Working Time Directive
Management and administrative
Acute voluntary hospitals €2.5bn (53%)
Non-acute agencies €2.2bn (47%)
Eight agencies accounted for over 50% of the funding
Work continued to enhance governance arrangements with section 38 and section 39 funded agencies.
Governance documentation for 2019 was again made available to the operational system from the beginning of the previous November, with a substantial number of Service Arrangements and Grant Aid Agreements being completed and signed by agencies before the end of March.
The review of governance at Board and Executive level in section 38 agencies continued with a further six reviews finalised in 2019 and 28 reviews completed to date.
Governance and Our Organisation
Additional warehouse storage capacity was provided to facilitate improved stock management.
Recruitment of extra staff for medicine compounding commenced to ensure greater resilience in these facilities.
New equipment and staff were provided to the Public Analyst Laboratory to increase capacity.
A detailed communications plan was developed and regular meetings took place with stakeholders, and with the DoH.
These statements were reviewed and matters requiring further clarification were addressed with the agencies concerned.
Preparing for Brexit
100 additional environmental health service posts were recruited in order to meet statutory obligations associated with food import controls.
A HSE Brexit planning group has been in place since 2017 and has worked closely with the DoH on a wide range of Brexit contingency planning and mitigating actions.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Listening to Our Service Users Listening to our Service Users
In order to provide high quality care, it is essential that we continually engage with patients and service users to ensure their views, concerns and experiences are at the centre of service delivery.
A number of areas were progressed during the year to promote patient and service user involvement across our health service.
While we have achieved good patient engagement at some levels within the organisation we also recognise that this is an evolving area of work.
We need to ensure that it continues to grow right throughout the organisation as we move to implement Sláintecare so that people who use our services are partnered with every step of the way to ensure that they are at the heart of the planning, design, delivery, implementation and evaluation of services. National Patient Experience Survey
Engaging and Partnering with People who use our Service
The survey, which first launched in 2017, is part of a broader programme to help improve the quality and safety of healthcare services provided to patients in Ireland by trying to understand how patients interact with the healthcare system and how they experience this process.
The 2019 survey contained a total of 61 questions on topics such as admission to hospital, care and treatment on the ward, trust in hospital staff, respect and dignity, and discharge from hospital.
All patients discharged in May aged 16 years and over, who spent 24 hours or more in one of the 40 participating hospitals and had a postal address in the Republic of Ireland, were asked during the year to complete the National Patient Experience Survey, a nationwide survey asking people for feedback about their stay in hospital.
In general, the findings were similar to those reported in 2018 with the exception of an improvement in the area of discharge of transfer.
While the survey results were generally positive, a significant number of patients did not have a good experience.
The sharing of these experiences helps identify areas where improvements are needed.
A further analysis on findings can be seen on page [27] of this Annual Report.
Over 12,300 people participated, a response rate of over 46%.
National Patient Forum
Discussion on the Assisted Decision-Making policy and legislation
Consultation on the development of the new Corporate Plan
Participation in a panel discussion at the State Claims Agency Patient Safety Conference.
Patients for Patient Safety Ireland –
Input into development of quality improvement training
Input into the Patient Safety Strategy 2019-2024
Feedback provided on the revised Open Disclosure Policy.
National Patient Representative Panel
Attendance at Sláintecare workshop on integrated community services
84% of respondents said they were always treated with respect and dignity while in hospital – –
Consultation on National Clinical Guidelines including for intraoperative massive haemorrhage and for nutrition screening and use of oral nutrition support for adults. HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Admission to Hospital
Care on the Ward
Examinations,
Diagnosis and Treatment
Discharge or Transfer
The average patient rating for the admissions stage of care was 7.9 out of 10
82% of respondents said that they were always treated with respect and dignity on the ward
30% of people said that they were admitted to a ward within the HSE’s target of six hours, with 4% saying they waited 48 hours or more before being admitted to a ward.
The average patient rating for care on the ward was 8.3 out of 10
96% of people said that their room was very clean or fairly clean
Most patients felt that staff did everything they could to help control their pain
Patients were less positive about hospital food with almost 28% saying it was poor or fair.
The average patient rating for examinations, diagnosis and treatment was 8.2 out of 10
86% of patients said that they were always given enough privacy when being examined or treated
Patients were less positive about communication with 39% saying they were not given, or were only to some extent given, enough time to discuss their care and treatment with their doctor.
The average patient rating for discharge or transfer was 7 out of 10
71% of respondents said that staff completely explained the purpose of medicines they were to take at home
However, just 45% said that staff completely explained the potential side effects of medications.
Supporting the use of microsystems in EDs which is designed to understand how every part of the patient’s journey can be improved
The ED Taskforce has set out a range of time defined actions to reduce overcrowding including optimising capacity, develop internal capability and process improvement and improving leadership, governance planning and oversight.
To improve patient care on the ward, in particular, the availability of staff to listen to the patient’s worries or fears, individual hospitals will promote patient advice and liaison services
The development of the HSE Food, Nutrition and Hydration Policy was launched and recommended nutritional screening and a patient-centred approach to delivery of services.
The National Healthcare Communication Programme was developed to improve communication of healthcare professionals.
The programme is designed to enable staff to take a skilled, sensitive and person-centred approach to all conversations with patients and their families
The HSE has also developed on-line citizen health guides to provide easy to understand health information to patients.
The HSE has established a national team to implement improvements for delayed discharges between hospital and community care
The HSE Code of Practice for Integrated Discharge Planning outlines the importance of providing patients with information about what to do after leaving the hospital, danger signs, who to contact and medication information.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Listening to our Service Users
The National Inpatient Experience Survey 2019 and What We Have Done – Listening, Responding and Improving Services
Listening to our Service Users
We established in 2019 a Cancer Patient Advisory Committee as part of the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026.
A selection process was undertaken by a group comprising representatives of the Irish Cancer Society, the HSE’s National Cancer Control Programme, the DoH and a member of the former Cancer Patient Forum.
The Committee comprises 15 members and its establishment is a significant advance in developing health services to meet the needs of patients.
Engage: National Men’s Health Training was developed in response to the growing demand from service providers for support to improve their engagement and interaction with men.
The training content was based upon the partners’ experience, evidence from academic and evaluation literature, and an extensive 24-month pilot phase.
Nurses and midwives were encouraged during the year to collect patient stories, which were collected into a book The Patient is Paramount.
Great stories can offer us valuable feedback about our patients’ experiences of healthcare services, challenging us and enabling us to develop a deeper understanding of these experiences, encouraging problem solving, new learning and discovery.
Service user input was an integral part of the process undertaken to develop a strategic framework for health and social care professions setting out a roadmap for them to deliver on Sláintecare.
Service users were invited to be involved in all consultations.
In October, 300 staff and 50 patients attended a series of masterclasses/briefings on Partnering with Patients.
Work began in collaboration with the All Ireland Institute of Hospice and Palliative Care on the production of videos of personal experiences of palliative care across Ireland.
Your Voice Matters is a project which captures the lived experiences of service users and their families by inviting them to describe a recent instance of engaging with health and social care service, focusing on what is most important to service users and allowing the opportunity to capture both positive and negative feedback.
This information is then used to inform service improvements.
To date 1,135 stories have been collected with the following key themes emerging: –
The need for clear communication and information
The need for improved access to services.
Through the experiences gathered from Your Voice Matters a number of service improvement initiatives have been undertaken including the launch of a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Peer Support Group in South Tipperary and COPD information leaflets and posters developed for use throughout the South East.
Engagement has begun with the Independent Patient Advocacy Service established by the DoH.
This new service will encourage patients to communicate with health services about any concerns.
A National Consent Policy Steering Group was convened.
Working groups have been established and have commenced a review of the policy and development of an e-learning programme.
Office of the Confidential Recipient The Office of Confidential Recipient is a national service that receives concerns/complaints such as allegations of abuse, negligence, mistreatment or poor care practices in HSE or HSE funded residential care facilities in an independent capacity and, in good faith, from patients, service users, families, other concerned individuals and staff members.
It has dealt with 896 formal concerns/complaints from across the country since its establishment in December 2014.
In 2019, the total number of formal concerns/complaints received by the Confidential Recipient was 155, a decrease of 51 on 2018.
The type of concerns raised included funding, leading to inappropriate placement, and lack of services for people with disabilities.
Appeals Service
The National Appeals Service ensures that applicants for eligibility schemes (e.g. medical cards/GP visit cards, residential support services maintenance and accommodation contributions, Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS)) are given their correct entitlement, and also provides governance to the HSE in relation to the correct application of legislation, regulations and guidelines.
2,184 cases were processed in 2019, of which 32% were allowed or partially allowed.
The Appeals Service shares the learning from appeals, including feedback from appellants, with scheme managers and other relevant stakeholders.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Medical/GP Visit Card (Over 70’s Scheme)
16 and 25 Year Old Medical Card/ GP Visit Card (* from 1 July 2019)
Nursing Homes Support Scheme
Common Summary Assessment Report
Homecare Package
Home Help
Residential Support Services Maintenance and Accommodation Contribution
Medical/GP Visit Card (General Scheme)
Note: Appeals received are from 01.01.2019-31.12.2019.
Those processed also relate to cases carried forward from 2018.
Compliments and Complaints
Health Service Executive (Excluding voluntary hospitals and agencies) Many compliments go unrecorded and work is on-going to encourage all staff to record compliments as they provide important information on the positive aspects of our service to assist in learning from what is working well.
In 2019, there were 9,872 compliments recorded.
There were 5,938 formal complaints recorded in 2019 and examined by complaints officers under the Health Act 2004 (as amended) and the Disability Act 2005, see Table 3.
Of these, 719 were excluded from investigation under the Your Service Your Say complaints process or withdrawn.
Of the remaining 5,219 complaints, 3,398 or 65% were resolved by a complaints officer either informally or through formal investigation within 30 working days.
Voluntary Hospitals and Agencies There were 17,139 compliments recorded in 2019.
There were also 12,160 complaints recorded and examined by complaints officers.
Of the total number of complaints received 11,757 were investigated.
The other 403 were either excluded or withdrawn.
Of those investigated, 9,760 or 83% were resolved by a complaints officer either informally or through formal investigation within 30 working days.
Complaints under Parts 2 and 3 of the Disability Act 2005 1,244 complaints were received in 2019 under Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 in relation to a child’s assessment of need for disability services, an increase of 68%.
842 complaints were received under part 2 of the Disability Act, 68% were recorded as resolved within 30 working days.
12 complaints were recorded as received under Part 3 of the Act, relating to access to buildings and services for people with disabilities.
Table 3: HSE Formal Complaints Received and % Dealt with Within 30 Working Days No. of complaints received
Data source: HSE Quality Assurance and Verification.
The introduction of the HSE’s Complaints Management System and increased staff training have resulted in enhanced reporting on formal complaints.
The number of complaints received now refers to those which are formally addressed by Complaints Officers only and no longer includes point of contact complaints, (which are reported separately) received by frontline services which have been immediately resolved.
This is reflected in 2019 data above in respect of both complaints received and those dealt with within 30 working days.
This figure includes 719 complaints received which were either excluded or subsequently withdrawn.
Table 4: Formal complaints received by category 2019 Listening to our Service Users
HSE (excluding voluntary hospitals and agencies)
Voluntary hospitals and agencies
Safe and effective care
Communication and information
Improving health
Accountability
Clinical judgement
Nursing homes/residential care for older people (65 and over)
Nursing homes/residential care (aged 64 and under)
Pre-school inspection services
Trust in care
Children first
Safeguarding vulnerable persons (new 2016)
Access
Dignity and respect
Vexatious complaints
Data Source: HSE Quality Assurance and Verification.
Note: Some complaints contain multiple issues and therefore fall under more than one category.
Learning from Feedback
Many people take the time to tell us about their experience of our services.
This feedback, much of which is positive also includes complaints.
Feedback, both positive and negative, can provide unique insights into the standards of care being provided to service users.
Being in a position to capture this feedback and experience is therefore central to how we learn and improve the quality of our services.
In 2019, the HSE began publishing quarterly casebooks on complaints received from the public and how they are addressed.
The complaints are anonymous and the purpose is to use it as a tool for learning and to facilitate the sharing of that learning.
This is a positive step as it provides an opportunity to publicly demonstrate our commitment to learn from the feedback we receive.
The establishment of the new independent Patient Advocacy Service in November 2019 provides a free, confidential and independent national service to help users of public hospitals making or intending to make a formal complaint through the HSE complaint process Your Service Your Say.
This new service will encourage patients to communicate with the health services first to resolve their complaint.
It aims to build positive relationships with the health services so that good communication is nurtured, and issues can be resolved efficiently and learned from.
Complaints addressed by Complaints Officers in HSE statutory services are either formal complaints or unresolved complaints escalated from point-of-contact in a frontline service.
During 2019, the HSE continued to support and empower staff to resolve complaints at point-of-contact through an interactive on-line module.
5,756 staff members have completed this module to date.
An additional 5,161 complaints were recorded as addressed by frontline staff as they occurred at point-of-contact.
Reform and Transformation
The Sláintecare Report (2017) and Sláintecare Implementation Strategy (2018) signal a new direction for the delivery of health and social care services in Ireland.
The implementation of Sláintecare has the potential to create a more sustainable, equitable, cost effective system that delivers better care and value for patient and services users.
At its core, the strategy focuses on establishing and delivering programmes of work to provide care closer to home at every stage of a person’s life, enabling our health service to be more responsive to patient and service user needs and to deliver better outcomes, with a strong focus on prevention and population health improvement.
A Sláintecare Action Plan 2019 was developed by the DoH and outlined the key areas of focus for the first full year of Sláintecare implementation.
It did this under four work-streams:
1. Service Redesign and Supporting Infrastructure
2. Safe Care, Co-ordinated Governance and Value for Money
3. Teams of the Future
4. Sharing Progress.
The vast majority of 2019 actions in the Sláintecare Action Plan have progressed in line with expectations and the 2020 Action Plan is in development.
This will include a particular focus on two priority Joint HSE/DoH Action Programmes of Capacity and Access and Regional Health Areas.
Given the need to ensure Sláintecare becomes fully embedded in everything we do, five high level reform and transformation priorities were identified for 2019:
Governance, leadership and corporate strategy
Transitional funding to shift the balance of care
Managing demand and continuing productivity improvement
Delivering programmes of work aligned to the Sláintecare Action Plan
Transformation support and enablement.
Transitional Funding to Shift the Balance of Care
The publication of the Government’s National Development Plan 2018-2027 has been a welcome development, creating a funding pipeline for capital developments that are aligned to Sláintecare.
In addition, in 2019 Sláintecare integration funding of approximately €20m was awarded to 91 projects from HSE or HSE funded services.
The objective of the integration fund is to test and then scale projects that are capable of achieving health or service improvements at a whole population level within the areas of chronic disease management and prevention, older persons’ services, health promotion and moving more care to the community.
Through productivity and service redesign, we have the opportunity to improve the quality of services for patients and create capacity to respond better to rising demand.
Large scale service redesign programmes were progressed, including work on the designation of major trauma centres and trauma networks, the elective care delivery model, clinical networks for specialists services (including nonconsultant led clinics), and urgent and emergency care networks.
Nine learning sites in the CHOs were agreed, representing the commencement of a phased implementation of the community healthcare network model that will respond to, among other priorities, the needs of people with chronic disease and those with frailty in the community.
Community Intervention Teams (CITs) were reviewed and re-focused to support the delivery of an increased volume of complex hospital avoidance and early discharge cases.
The Capacity and Access Joint Working Programme was jointly established by the HSE and DoH and work has commenced to deliver on the recommendations of the Health Service Capacity Review 2018.
These recommendations form the starting point for developing our capacity across acute and community services while, in parallel, reducing bed demand and improving the health of the population.
Work continued in 2019 to progress a number of programmes of work, including:
Several improvement initiatives commenced and continued in line with existing clinical programmes and international best practice in the area of scheduled and unscheduled care.
Design and development of new health service structures
Staff engagement
Population profiling
Development and implementation of eHealth initiatives
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Reform and Transformation
Review of existing service design for chronic disease and access to radiology
Future capacity expansion
Healthy Ireland and health and wellbeing initiatives
Strengthening clinical leadership.
In addition to the detail above, progress against many other 2019 priorities aligned with Sláintecare can be seen throughout this Annual Report.
Transformation Support and Enablement A dedicated Strategic Transformation Office has been established within the HSE to lead, drive and actively support implementation of the reform programme.
The office will also provide assurance to the Board, highlighting issues of concern and identifying corrective actions required.
The office will also support and enable services to deliver strategic reforms at frontline service level where it will be best experienced by our communities, people who use our services and their families.
Research and Evidence
We are striving towards the vision of making the HSE a health system renowned for its culture of building and using knowledge for health and wellbeing.
Research Activity in the HSE and its Funded Organisations was launched highlighting the significant level of research activity in the health service.
The first ever HSE Action Plan for Health Research 2019-2029 was also launched which provides a road map to build research capacity and culture in the health service in a way that delivers real patient impact.
Implementation of the National Health Library and Knowledge service continued with significant reform to provide equitable access to knowledge resources and service provision to all HSE healthcare staff.
The first milestones towards the development of an open access National eHealth Library were also successfully completed.
BMJ Best Practice, a point of care tool especially useful for primary and community services will be available nationally to enable evidence-based practice across the service in 2020.
Clinical, Quality and Patient Safety
Clinical Leadership
A review of the national clinical programmes was undertaken early in the year offering the opportunity to consolidate the programmes along themes that make sense to patients and service areas ensuring an integrated care approach to service design, in line with Sláintecare.
A number of recommendations were made following the review and work continues to implement these.
These recommendations include:
A strategic framework setting out a roadmap for HSCPs to deliver Sláintecare was substantially completed.
It was informed by a comprehensive consultation involving service users, HSCP and other key stakeholders.
The framework will be finalised early in 2020.
Enhancing Nursing
Midwifery Services
Establishment of a clinical forum
Alignment with principles of Sláintecare
Improved governance to connect, align and integrate clinical leadership
• 710 nurses/midwives were supported to undertake leadership training
Appointment of a National Lead for Integrated Care
Merging of certain clinical programmes.
4,000 staff accessed the Clinical Leadership Competency on-line resource
1,279 nurses and midwives now have authority to prescribe medicines
488 nurses and midwives registered as nurse and midwife referrers on HSE national database for nurse and midwife referrers of ionising radiation (x-ray)
National clinical programmes pilot and evaluate clinical designs that treat patients at the lowest level of complexity that is safe, timely, efficient and as close to home as possible.
During the year, work continued to deliver care through this approach, including
Completion of a COPD collaborative project which enabled care improvements in 18 participating hospitals
Commencement of a back pain pathway pilot
Commencement of a research project to develop a profile of Emergency Department (ED) attendees.
2,010 nurses and midwives were sponsored to undertake postgraduate education programmes
3,438 continuing education programmes were provided to 40,339 nurses, midwives and healthcare assistants
30 health service employees were sponsored nationally to commence training as nurses/midwives
Cystic Fibrosis
Paediatric Critical Care
COPD
Specialist Perinatal Mental Health Services
Eating Disorders
The National Stroke Register Report 2018 was published
The report represents the largest data capture to date of Irish stroke trends, treatment and outcomes, processes of care and provision of therapy to patients.
The report showed encouraging trends in mortality from stroke due to blood clotting (ischaemic stroke) which is at a historic low of 7.8%, down from 10.9% in 2015.
The Clinical Director Development Programme continued to provide support to the clinical directorate, with the Executive Skills Programme commencing its third programme.
A health and social care professions (HSCP) leadership study was completed HSCP Leadership: An examination of context, impact, supports, challenges and areas for consideration.
It will inform plans to support and develop HSCP leadership in 2020.
Clinical, Quality and Patient Safety
Our aim is to continually improve the quality of care we deliver, learning from patient experience to ensure the safety of all who use our services.
In addition the Office of Nursing and Midwifery Services led on the development of a Health Passport for people with intellectual disabilities accessing healthcare settings.
This was launched and disseminated nationally.
It received Sláintecare project funding to support up scaling and further dissemination.
Clinical, Quality and Patient Safety
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) and Infection Control
Significant improvements have been made in relation to AMR and infection control across the health service, with some key highlights as follows:
A process was developed for rapid whole genome sequencing to track the spread of carbapenemaseproducing enterobacterales (CPE) and other antibiotic resistant organisms.
A number of guidelines were developed/supported including:
A single World Health Organisation technique for performing hand hygiene has been agreed as the method being performed and taught.
Previously, there were two different methods in place which could cause confusion for staff moving between healthcare settings.
A survey was undertaken to learn about existing surveillance activities for surgical site infection.
Responses received indicated that 69% of respondents had local surveillance projects in place and strong interest was indicated in developing a national surveillance programme.
Work continues in establishing standard protocols and developing tools for data collection and analysis.
Campaigns were run to raise awareness amongst healthcare professionals and the general public including hse.ie/UndertheWeather, European Antibiotic Awareness Week, Hand Hygiene week and the winter campaign.
The first Director of Nursing for Infection Control and Prevention for the HSE was appointed.
A quality improvement project, working to improve antibiotic prescribing in the community, was planned and implemented with the Primary Care Reimbursement Service.
Balancing competing demands in relation to bed use related to infection prevention and control
Laboratory testing for CPE and the interpretation of clinical application of results
Prevention and control of CPE in patients on haemodialysis treatment
Infection control principles for buildings.
CPE screening was rolled out in acute hospitals.
A survey of hospital acquired infections and antimicrobial use in Irish hospitals in 2017 was published.
The EU wide survey in which 60 Irish hospitals (46 public and 14 private) volunteered, provided a snapshot of hospital acquired infections and antibiotic use across participating hospitals on a single day and there were welcome improvements from the previous survey in 2012.
All participating hospitals now have an infection prevention and control nurse and the number of single patient rooms has increased from 22% in 2012 to 28% in 2017.
Additionally, a reduction was seen in hospital acquired infections from indwelling devices (intravenous drips and urinary catheters).
Patient Safety Strategy 2019-2024 Keeping patients and service users safe is the overriding priority for those working in the health service.
National and international evidence however shows us that as many as one in eight patients suffer harm while using healthcare services, with up to 70% of this harm being preventable.
Many excellent patient safety initiatives have been implemented in recent years resulting in measureable improvements.
The development of the strategy builds on this and is an important example of how real and meaningful partnerships between patients and those working at each level of the health service can generate a shared vision for a more compassionate health service, one that learns when things go wrong, responds accordingly and reduces harm to those who entrust their lives and care to us.
The strategy sets out six commitments:
Empower and engage patients to improve patient safety
Empower staff to improve patient safety
Anticipate and respond to risks to patient safety
Reduce common causes of harm
Measure and learn to improve patient safety
Provide effective leadership and governance to improve patient safety.
The Patient Safety Strategy 2019-2024 is aligned closely with Sláintecare.
A high level implementation plan and communication plan are in development and engagement has commenced with various stakeholders throughout the service.
A consultation process is also being rolled out to seek input into how best to support services in the strategy’s implementation.
The Patient Safety (Notifiable Patient Safety Incidents) Bill 2019 was published which will legislate for a number of important patient safety measures.
The legislation established a robust framework for mandatory open disclosure and includes a new process to designate patient safety incidents for which mandatory open disclosure must occur.
A second purpose of the new legislation is to enable national learning and to support health service wide improvements so that harm to patients can be prevented.
Further information on open disclosure can be seen in the Safeguarding and Protection section of this Annual Report.
The HSE was awarded a global sepsis award for its significant efforts to increase sepsis awareness and raise the quality of sepsis prevention and management.
The jury was particularly impressed by the improvement of recognition of sepsis, by all clinicians, in patients who are deteriorating due to an infection.
Early detection and treatment of sepsis is crucial in reducing the mortality rate.
Between 2011 and 2018, the number of cases reported in adults increased from 6,495 to 15,379 indicating increased recognition and reporting of sepsis.
This was accompanied by a reduction in the mortality from 26.8% to 19.4% in the same time period.
• The Medication Safety programme delivered three phases of the Know Check Ask campaign, encouraging people to know their medicines and keep a list, check that they are using the right medicine the right way and ask their healthcare professional if they are unsure.
All pharmacies, GPs, primary care and health centres received campaign posters, and pharmacies also received My Medicines Lists.
To reduce avoidable falls and pressure ulcers, and increase the capacity of quality improvement knowledge and skills within the system, two concurrent quality improvement collaboratives took place in Cork and in Cavan, involving 26 multi-disciplinary teams and over 170 participants.
Clinical audit skills training was delivered to 173 staff from acute and community services.
Audits from the National Office of Clinical Audit are used to recognise areas of excellence and those requiring improvement, including identifying outliers in acute services.
The audits also support policy development, service planning, best practice and reporting.
The Stroke Register was transitioned to a National Clinical Audit of Stroke
The first national report for the Irish National Clinical Audit of Intensive Care Units was published
New quarterly dashboards for the Irish Hip Fracture Database were implemented.
The building of quality improvement capacity and capability across all services continued through designing, developing and delivering the following learning programmes: –
Diploma in Leadership and Quality in Healthcare and the Diploma in Quality for Community Care
Foundation in Quality Improvement Programme.
Quality improvement talktime webinars cover a wide range of topics and feature national and international speakers.
There were over 21 webinars and on average 79 participants per webinar in 2019 and their regular broadcast continues to build a network of quality improvers in our health service.
The Final Report of the Evaluation of the Introduction of Schwartz Rounds in Ireland was launched.
The report highlighted that Schwartz Rounds benefit teamwork and support reductions in staff stress levels by offering a forum for staff to share experiences in a structured environment, irrespective of their role or status within the organisation.
27 services across the country are now introducing Schwartz Rounds and the numbers continue to grow.
Significant work was undertaken with services to enable patient safety improvements in the following priority areas: –
Medication safety
Quality Improvement for Healthcare Boards
Deteriorating patient.
Safeguarding and Protection
Safeguarding
Further details on the HSE safeguarding service including reports are on hse.ie/safeguarding.
The Safeguarding Vulnerable Persons at Risk of Abuse – National Policy and Procedures (HSE Adult Safeguarding Policy) resulted in the setting up of Safeguarding and Protection Teams (SPTs) and the HSE National Safeguarding Office. This policy publicly declared a ‘No Tolerance’ approach to any form of abuse and for all services to promote a culture which supports this ethos. •
There are now over 70 social work staff in SPTs supported by administrative staff.
There are over 1,700 designated officers across the social care sector with lead safeguarding roles.
An independent inter-sectoral National Safeguarding Committee has been developed now known as Safeguarding Ireland, which involves over 30 partners across public, voluntary and private sectors is working to promote and advance the rights of vulnerable adults at a national level.
The National Safeguarding Office Annual Report 2018 was published.
11,780 safeguarding concerns were received, representing a 14% increase on 2017
For those aged 18 to 64 years of age, the most significant category of abuse alleged remains physical abuse at 50%, followed by psychological abuse at 31%
For those aged over 65 years, the most significant category of abuse alleged is psychological abuse at 33%, with physical abuse at 26% and financial abuse at 21%
Over the past three years, an extensive programme of awareness training has been implemented for over 55,000 staff.
1,743 designated officers with a lead role for screening and notifying cases of alleged abuse and neglect, who have undergone training are registered, 384 of whom were newly trained in 2018.
A review of Safeguarding Vulnerable Persons at Risk of Abuse – National Policy and Procedures which commenced in 2017 was completed.
The revised policy will be implemented in three phases and the first preparatory phase will take place in 2020.
Public Awareness Campaign 2019
Public awareness campaigns, commissioned by Safeguarding Ireland have focused on the prevention of abuse, planning ahead and the need for greater conversations around abuse within society.
The 2019 campaign which was launched in May found that:
10% of Irish adults have witnessed adult abuse in the past year and 81% have said that tougher laws would encourage them to take greater action to combat abuse
12% of those who witnessed abuse of a vulnerable adult in the past year did nothing at all, while 47% discussed it with the person being abused and 40% discussed it with a trusted person
Just 15% sought professional advice and 3% reported what they witnessed to an authority such as the HSE or Gardaí.
The hse.ie/safeguarding page received more visitors during May than at any other point in the year illustrating that the public awareness campaign has a positive impact on social media traffic to sites associated with safeguarding.
The National Independent Review Panel (NIRP) was established in 2017 to undertake reviews of serious cases within disability services across the health service.
The NIRP review the circumstances surrounding such cases and present reports to the HSE on its findings and recommendations relating to service improvement.
In addition, the NIRP produces an annual report and aggregate analysis of the cases investigated, to ensure that the learning can be disseminated across health and social care services nationally.
Updated operational guidelines were published in March, setting out the purpose and principles of the NIRP and providing clear guidance on the process to be followed for all reviews.
Open Disclosure
A revised Open Disclosure Policy Communicating with Patients Following Patient Safety Incidents was published and launched in 2019.
Open disclosure means that patients and their relevant person(s), as appropriate, will be communicated with in an open, honest, timely and transparent manner if: •
Something goes wrong with patient care
Patients experience harm as a result of their care
We think that harm may have occurred as a result of patient care.
Under the revised policy, patients have a right to:
Full knowledge about their care and treatment
Be informed when things go wrong
Meet with us to discuss what happened
A sincere apology if we made an error while caring for them
Be treated with compassion and empathy.
The National Open Disclosure policy, programme and training programme is co-ordinated via the National Open Disclosure Office which was established in May.
To date over 45,000 staff have accessed open disclosure training with over 400 staff now trained as trainers across all care areas.
The national office also supports the implementation of open disclosure legislation across all health and social care services.
An Open Disclosure Steering Group has been established.
Its role is to oversee the progress of the Open Disclosure programme of work.
In fulfilling this role, the National Open Disclosure Steering Committee will champion, advance, support and provide strategic advice on the on-going implementation of the National Open Disclosure Programme and policy.
The Steering Group has developed a governance framework for monitoring and evaluating the policy and compliance with its application throughout the HSE.
The full policy is available on hse.ie.
A revised HSE Child Protection and Welfare Policy was published, aligning with the requirements outlined under the Children First Act 2015 and the principles of the Children First National Guidance for the Protection and Welfare of Children.
Over 50,000 staff across the HSE and HSE funded and contracted services completed the mandatory HSE programme An Introduction to Children First, bringing the total number trained to over 220,000 since 2016.
A new training programme was developed and piloted in preparation for roll-out from 2020.
Since publication of this Annual Report 2019 and typographical error made, the number of Protected Disclosures was amended from 2,105 to 57.
Operational Performance
Community healthcare
Operational performance in 2019 was measured primarily on the basis of how we delivered against our NSP for 2019
which set out the type and volume of health and social care services to be provided by the HSE in 2019, in response to the funding made available and the level of staff to be deployed.
Priorities and Actions
The NSP 2019 has over 125 priorities with 555 supporting actions across all areas of service delivery and enabling functions.
Mental health services
Difficulties were experienced in recruiting and retaining skilled staff across mental health services.
Particular challenges were experienced in delivering 7/7 Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) due to the lack of consultants nationally and internationally.
Key performance indicators and activity levels
A high level overview is provided below on the key performance indicators and activity data 2019 against 2018.
Any risks are being mitigated through further engagement with relevant stakeholders to resolve issues and where relevant are included in risk registers.
Older persons’ services
Waiting lists for home support have become a feature of the service as resources have not kept pace with population growth or with the increasing dependency of the growing numbers of people aged over 80 years, within the over 65 years’ cohort.
There was an increase in the number of home support hours provided in 2019 (2.1%); however the numbers in receipt of home support from intensive homecare packages decreased (-7.2%).
The National Transitional Care Scheme assists patients in acute hospitals who are ready for discharge but need nursing homecare or a period of convalescence up to a maximum of 4 weeks.
The scheme funds these patients in private nursing homes which facilitates the timely discharge of patients from acute hospitals.
Compliance with regulations following HIQA inspections worsened (10.2%)
€13m for NHSS to reduce period awaiting funding to four weeks until 31 December 2019
€4.2m transitional care funding to support discharge from acute hospitals
€2m for home support packages to support delayed transfers of care and community waiting lists
A high level overview is provided below on the acute key performance indicators and activity data 2019 against 2018. 
There was an increase in overall acute activity (inpatient and day case) (1.5%) but specifically day case treatment (2.8%).
The total number of people waiting for an inpatient or day case appointment fell in 2019, notwithstanding the impact of four strike days resulting in a loss of over 9,500 cases.
The HSE and National Treatment Purchase Fund (NTPF) continue to focus on both the total number of people waiting and those people waiting the longest and will continue in 2020 to agree individual treatment plans for patients within the public system or externally where appropriate.
Our outpatient waiting lists remain a significant challenge.
Operational Performance
The number of older people in receipt of home support at any time varies depending on the level of need of those in receipt of services.
Despite the significant resource allocated to home support, demand for home support continues to exceed the level of service that can be funded.
Population Health and Wellbeing
Population health and wellbeing is about helping our whole population to stay healthy and well by focusing on prevention, protection and health promotion and improvement.
Supporting and improving the health of the population is a fundamental goal of developing a sustainable health service.
Sláintecare recognises the importance of supporting people to look after and protect their own health and wellbeing.
Healthy Ireland, the national strategy for improved health and wellbeing, is underpinned by a whole-system philosophy involving cross-government and cross-societal responsibility.
The health system continues to play an important leadership role in driving a whole-system shift towards a culture in Ireland that places greater emphasis and value on prevention and keeping people well. • Healthy Eating and Active Living Programme –
The HSE funded Community Cooking Programme Healthy Food Made Easy is a six week programme delivered in disadvantaged communities to support people to better understand nutrition and to learn cooking skills.
5,100 people attended community cooking programmes around the country.
The new Food, Nutrition and Hydration Policy for Adult Patients in Acute Hospitals was launched.
A toolkit to support local implementation was also developed and is available on hse.ie.
This new policy aims to ensure that all adult patients in acute hospitals receive a patient-centred food and nutrition service, from their admission to their discharge from hospital.
Delivery of the START campaign in partnership with Safefood continued, offering families a number of practical, achievable tips to help make healthier lifestyle changes.
The campaign which is underpinned by A Healthy Weight for Ireland: Obesity Policy and Action Plan 2016-2025 and Healthy Weight for Children (0-6 years) Framework connected directly with families through the GAA semi-final in Croke Park and the National Ploughing Championships.
Health and Wellbeing
Implementing the Healthy Ireland Framework
Healthy Ireland Implementation Plans were launched for the two remaining CHOs with implementation plans now in place for all nine CHOs.
Implementation of Healthy Ireland plans continued in five of the seven Hospital Groups.
The report highlights how the men who successfully engaged in a 12 week physical activity programme in eight Local Sports Partnerships (LSPs) reduced their weight and cardiovascular risk by 30% and improved their overall health and wellbeing.
Work commenced on rolling out the programme across the national network of 29 LSPs.
20 workshops Introduction to Youth Mental Health
4 workshops Minding your Wellbeing.
In 2019, 1,792 staff completed the e-Learning MECC training in brief intervention and 367 frontline staff completed the face to face MECC training in brief intervention.
Self-Management Support
During 2019, 89 training courses were delivered to 1,599 primary and post primary teachers throughout the country.
In partnership with Jigsaw, a number of workshops were delivered to 411 youth leaders and youth workers including:
Improving the health and wellbeing of the population
Education Programme
Alcohol Programme
Know the Score: Substance Use Resource Materials for Senior Cycle SPHE was developed as an evidence based resource for teachers of students aged 15 to 18 years.
It is designed to engage young people in exploring and considering a wide range of topics related to the risks associated with drugs and alcohol.
People were encouraged to look at their relationship with alcohol by taking the self-assessment test on askaboutalcohol.ie during awareness week on alcohol related harm.
The self-assessment tool is designed to help people understand more about the impact their drinking is having on their lives.
A total of 14,000 people used the tool between April 2017 and December 2019.
Tobacco Free Ireland –
Sexual health and wellbeing is an important part of overall health and wellbeing and is one of the key priorities under Healthy Ireland
The foundation programme in sexual health promotion was delivered in 10 locations nationally, supporting service providers who want to develop their confidence, skills and knowledge in the area of sexual health promotion and incorporate sexual health promotion into their work.
The Fast Track Cities is a global initiative that aims to boost HIV prevention, treatment and support initiatives, while reducing HIV related stigma.
Funding of €450,000 supported developments in community-based HIV testing and outreach services in Dublin, Cork, Limerick and Galway, as well as public campaigns on reducing stigma.
A phased introduction of a drug-based HIV prevention programme was implemented.
The free provision of Pre-exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) for people from at-risk populations was announced.
The PrEP Programme involves the pre-emptive use of antiretroviral medication to prevent HIV infection, within a holistic service which includes regular monitoring and testing as well as advice and counselling on safer sex practices.
The initial roll-out of this programme in public sexually transmitted infections clinics commenced.
The National Freephone Crisis Pregnancy Counselling telephone service My Options was launched and more on this can be seen on page [49] of this Annual Report.
Roll-out of the National Condom Distribution Service in third level settings commenced in November 2019 whereby third level colleges can now order free condom dispensers from the HSE, providing free condoms and sexual health information to students on campuses nationwide.
A new LGBT+ eLearning course was developed and launched in conjunction with LGBT Ireland.
It is designed to help all staff develop an understanding of how making simple changes to everyday practice can provide enhanced service to the LGBT+ community.
Nurture
The Healthy Weight for Children (0-6 years) Framework was published.
As part of its implementation two on-line training modules for staff working with children and families were developed and launched.
The HSE’s breastfeeding website was merged into mychild.ie, together with the Facebook pages to provide a single, expert site for advice and a richer range of supports regarding child health information for parents and parents to be.
The merging of the sites has shown increased and very positive engagement on breastfeeding posts.
Population Health and Wellbeing –
Protecting the population from threats to their health and wellbeing
Immunisation –
42.2% of healthcare workers received seasonal flu vaccine during the 2018/2019 period in long-term care facilities.
This is a substantial increase on 2018 uptake (33.1%).
53.2% of healthcare workers received the seasonal flu vaccine in acute hospitals, an increase on 2018 (44.8%).
The 2019/2020 schools human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine programme was launched.
The vaccine is now being given to all first year students in secondary schools, including for the first time, boys.
As part of the campaign new and informative videos were developed.
Over 60,000 information packs were delivered across the country in advance of the vaccination programme commencing in September.
The uptake of the vaccine will be available later in 2020 as the programme is still on-going.
Health Protection and Surveillance Centre
The Health Protection and Surveillance Centre protects our population from threats to their health and wellbeing through investigation, surveillance and management of infectious disease control.
644 infectious disease outbreaks were notified under the national infectious disease reporting schedule.
Environmental Health Service
Responding to the impact of Brexit, capacity was increased to ensure official controls on food imports at ports and airports could be carried out and additional requests for food export certificates could be met.
Further information in relation to preparing for Brexit can be seen on page [25] of this Annual Report.
In general, compliance with the Public Health (Tobacco) Act, 2002 was high.
However, there were 124 prosecution cases in 2019 which resulted in convictions for tobacco related offences.
The Public Health (Sunbeds) Act 2014 is designed to protect young people and promote a more informed choice among adults in relation to the use of sunbeds.
During the year, work continued on conducting inspections, test purchases and mystery shopper inspections.
Population Health and Wellbeing
Work commenced on agreeing a new Food Safety Authority of Ireland and HSE Service Contract.
Work continued with the DoH in preparing for the enforcement of significant provisions under the Public Health (Alcohol) Act 2018 which will become operational in 2020.
BowelScreen – Targeted communication and promotion of the BowelScreen programme was undertaken to increase uptake of the programme amongst eligible men and women aged 60-69 years.
Participation amongst men was still lower than women and focused campaigns targeting men were undertaken during the year, including promotion of the programme through men’s sheds and at the Ploughing Championships.
The project to introduce digital surveillance screening was implemented and people are now being invited to attend digital surveillance screening nationally.
This model will enhance the patient treatment pathway and support a more community based care model.
The successful contract negotiations with laboratories resulted in increased capacity, helping restore turnaround times to six weeks for women by August 2019.
This was critical to the continuation of cervical screening in Ireland.
The HPV primary screening project was re-established and substantial work was undertaken to prepare for the introduction of HPV primary screening early in 2020.
Substantial investment was made in increasing resources including employing advisors in pathology and colposcopy.
Additional resources were also brought into programme management, laboratory, support staff and quality assurance.
A significant team and associated planning process was put in place to support the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecology (RCOG) review which was completed in December.
This ensured that women received their RCOG reports in a timely and compassionate manner.
Supports continue to be provided to women impacted by the CervicalCheck audit through the Community Liaison Officer.
The age extension of the BreastCheck programme was further implemented with screening extended to the remaining women aged 67 years together with a portion of women aged 68 years.
Uptake remained high with a greater number of women attending for mammography screening than was targeted.
However, challenges remain in ensuring all women are seen within the recommended timeframe, with 49% of women invited to screening in BreastCheck waiting longer than 24 months for their screening mammogram.
A report published by the National Cancer Registry Ireland indicated that the five-year survival rate for female breast cancer improved by 15% between 1994 and 2015.
With improved screening, breast cancer is increasingly being diagnosed at an earlier stage, with the percentage of stage 1 cases increasing from 21% in 1994-1999 to 33% in 2008-2015.
Implementation of the Scoping Inquiry into the CervicalCheck Screening Programme, 2018 (Scally Report)
Progress reports on the implementation of the recommendations of the Scoping Inquiry into the CervicalCheck Screening Programme, 2018 (Scally Report) were published during the year demonstrating substantial progress.
The HSE has responsibility for implementing 42 of the 58 recommendations and, since publication of the Scally Report, has completed 105 of the 116 actions against these recommendations.
Many of the recommendations have implications across the whole health service and are not just related to the CervicalCheck programme.
An organisation design project resulted in an improved governance structure and a significant number of new appointments in all programmes.
These included clinical advisors, operations management and public health positions.
The National Screening Service launched its first Patient and Public Partnership Strategy 2019-2023 setting out how it will strengthen its partnership with patients and the public over the next four years, including ensuring that service users can influence decisions on the design, delivery and evaluation of services.
Further work was undertaken to improve the quality assurance process across all programmes, including updating guidelines and strengthening quality assurance committees and resources.
It should be noted that for coverage purposes, CervicalCheck reports only those tests carried out in a primary care setting and these equated to 206,315 in 2019 compared to 339,161 in 2018.
Since the programme started in 2008, more than 3m screening tests have been carried out and the rates of cervical cancer in Ireland have decreased by 7% year on year.
Over 100,000 cases of abnormal cervical cells have been detected, many of which could have developed into cancer if not detected.
234,000 smear tests in all settings were carried out in 2019 compared to 370,000 in 2018.
The increase in 2018 was due to the demand for out-of-cycle screening tests during the CervicalCheck crisis.
Population Health and Wellbeing
Community Healthcare
Primary Care Services
Sláintecare sets out the need for a shift from provision of care from acute to community settings, supporting the prevention and management of chronic disease at a community level.
It positions Community Healthcare Networks (CHNs) as the fundamental unit of organisation for the delivery of services in the community.
CHNs are geographically-based units delivering services to an average population of 50,000.
There will be 96 CHNs with each CHO having between eight and 14 CHNs enabling a co-ordinated multi-disciplinary approach to care provision, providing better outcomes for people requiring services and supports both within and across networks.
Nine CHN learning sites were agreed and nine Community Network Managers recruited.
In addition, 65 staff members were recruited including therapists and nurses.
Development of these sites will inform the future roll-out of the 96 CHNs.
Building capacity in general practice –
Key initiatives include the roll-out of electronic prescribing and the development of summary and shared care electronic patient records which will make healthcare safer and more efficient.
The recruitment of 40 occupational therapists commenced with a focus on addressing patients waiting over 52 weeks.
A number of quality improvement initiatives within community intervention teams (CITs) and Outpatient Parenteral Antimicrobial Therapy (OPAT) were implemented including the commencement of a haemochromatosis clinic in Tuam Primary Care Centre and a review of OPAT services.
GPs play a central role in achieving the movement of care towards primary care services.
The roll-out of the National Dental Record and Information system was completed.
This is the HSE’s first nationwide clinical information system.
The system is live in 221 primary care locations across 26 counties and is accessible by all HSE dentists around the country.
Hepatitis C –
As part of the hepatitis C treatment programme, six new community treatment sites were developed and preparation is underway for two new acute sites.
A new consultant was appointed to provide outreach and clinical governance in community and acute outreach services.
Nursing services were also extended in three acute treatment sites.
A new proof of concept regarding community dispensing and prescribing by GPs commenced.
Training and support sessions were provided to nine GPs and eight community pharmacists.
Primary care centres
Expanding community and primary care is at the heart of the Sláintecare vision.
Developing modern, well equipped and accessible infrastructure is key to changing the way we deliver care.
Primary care centres support the strategic shift of care and services to primary care, ensuring better access to care, offering individuals and families a one stop shop to a broad range of primary care services in the community.
341 prioritised locations were identified during 2012 based on service need, existing facilities and level of deprivation.
Of the 341 identified, 129 are operational at the end of 2019 with 74 in the process of development.
Taken together this represents 203 or 60% of the original 341 locations identified.
An overarching review of all primary care centres will be completed in 2020 including an update of the rankings of proposed locations and a determination of how further delivery is to be prioritised.
A range of delivery models were also identified including development of centres through exchequer funded development (Capital Plan), Public Private Partnership Programme and through operational lease.
Improving health outcomes for the most vulnerable in society •
Addiction services
Additional funding of €2.28m over three years was provided to tackle drug and alcohol misuse in the community, supporting the 12 strategic health initiatives to address priorities set out in the National Drugs Strategy Reducing Harm, Supporting Recovery, A health-led response to drug and alcohol use in Ireland 2017-2025.
In collaboration with Tusla, the needs of children affected by parental problem alcohol and other drug use are being addressed.
Hidden Harm, Practice Guide was published, setting out how to bridge the gap between adult and children’s services in favour of a more family-focused approach that considers the needs of dependent children and other family members.
An eLearning training programme was developed and commenced.
The development of the hidden harm skills based practice training also commenced.
Homeless services
The HSE National Domestic, Sexual and Gender-Based Violence Training Resource Manual, Recognising and Responding to Victims of Domestic, Sexual and GenderBased Violence in Vulnerable or At-Risk Communities was launched in partnership with Sonas.
Traveller, refugee, asylum seeker and Roma communities – Eight Traveller mental health co-ordinators were appointed to eight of the CHOs and the development of a joint stepped model of care across primary care and mental health services was progressed to support Travellers with mental health needs. Community Healthcare
Implementation of Rebuilding Ireland, Action Plan for Housing and Homelessness progressed through additional Housing First tenancies which have been established in Cork, Limerick, Galway, the South East region and Dublin.
Enhancement of health supports has been established in these areas and the development of a health monitoring and evaluation framework commenced.
Termination of Pregnancy Services
The Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018, which was signed into law in 2018, broadens the circumstances in which termination of pregnancy may be legally permitted in Ireland and the service, which went live on 1 January 2019, is now provided in community and acute care services across the country.
Additional funding of €12m was provided in 2019 to support services.
A 24-hour free phone helpline and counselling service My Options was launched (1800 828 010) and provides free and confidential information and counselling to those experiencing an unplanned pregnancy.
Since its commencement on 1 January, the helpline received 16,007 calls including 13,214 to the information and support line and 2,793 to the nursing line.
A new website myoptions.ie was also launched and provides information about continued pregnancy supports and how to access termination of pregnancy services.
A Clinical Lead for Termination of Pregnancy services was appointed in December.
The Lead will chair a Clinical Advisory Forum which will have representatives from all key stakeholders.
The forum will support the continued provision of a high-quality, safe service to women who require this service.
352 GPs are providing termination of pregnancy services.
10 of the 19 maternity hospitals are providing the full range of termination of pregnancy services and arrangements are underway for a phased increase to other maternity hospitals.
All maternity hospitals are providing care for complications following a termination of pregnancy, diagnosis of a fatal foetal abnormality or situations where maternal health/life is at risk.
All maternity hospitals are providing the ancillary services required for termination of pregnancy including anti D provision and scans.
Mental Health Services
Community Healthcare
Recovery focused services
The Model of Care for People with Severe and Enduring Mental Illness and Complex Needs was launched.
This is part of a range of initiatives developed to provide recovery focused care for service users including the establishment of two national specialised rehabilitation units and the creation of a national referral process.
A National Framework for Recovery in Mental Health 2018-2020 builds on the committed efforts of service users, family members, carers and service providers to develop a more recovery-oriented mental health service.
The Framework outlines four key principles, including actions and measures that underpin a recovery oriented service.
Each CHO has developed an implementation plan for the framework in their area.
The Wellness Recovery Action Plan (WRAP) supports people to manage their wellness recovery and is recognised internationally as being one of the most popular self-management tools for maintaining mental health and wellness.
A five day facilitator training day was held across a number of CHOs providing an opportunity for staff and service users to train together as WRAP facilitators.
Improving access to mental health services and improving service user flow •
A new 24-hour free phone service (1800 111 888) which provides information on how to access services was launched.
In partnership with National Ambulance Service this dedicated phone line will provide help to those experiencing mental ill health and their families to access information when they most need it.
Since yourmentalhealth.ie was redeveloped and launched in 2018, the site has seen over 845,000 visits.
Promoting simple and powerful day-to-day steps to protect our own mental health and support the people we care about continues on radio and social media.
Updated information is available on yourmentalhealth.ie.
In line with National Youth Mental Health Task Force Report 2017, a new text-based active listening service, Crisis Text Line, is being established for people who are feeling suicidal or facing a mental health crisis, and is recruiting 300 volunteers to provide support.
It will be Ireland’s first free 24-hour seven day week confidential text messaging service for people in crisis anytime, anywhere.
This initiative is funded by the HSE and is aimed predominately at 16 to 34 year olds for whom messaging is their preferred method of engagement but is available to all ages.
The service will connect people with a volunteer, working remotely who has been trained to listen, reassure and guide people in their moment of crisis.
In 2019, 255 volunteers were trained.
There were 3,300 engagements with service users, 79% of which were aged between 14 and 34 years.
The quality rating from service users on these engagements reflects a 92% satisfaction rating.
The Jigsaw network provides a range of early intervention services for young people aged 12 to 25 years experiencing mild to moderate mental health difficulties. The development of two new services in Co.
Wicklow and Co. Tipperary is continuing, expanding youth mental services from 12 to 14 in 2020.
One new psychiatry of later life team was put in place, increasing the total to 32 teams nationally.
Enhancing secondary mental health services –
One new Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) team was put in place in Cavan/ Monaghan, increasing the total to 71.
Engaging with service users, family members and carers •
80 people, including services users, family members, supporters and service providers took part in a three and a half day skills based pilot programme.
This initiative was a collaborative approach to support and build skills for mental health engagement and recovery forum training.
Following success of the pilot, the programme was further rolled out across the country.
My Voice Matters report was launched which includes the findings of two national surveys into people’s experience of mental health services in the HSE.
The research which was funded by the HSE included the experience of 1,188 service users and 786 family members, friends, carers and supporters, both positive and negative, with findings used to inform service improvements.
Areas of satisfaction included care received from GPs while areas which require improvement include access to written recovery/care plans, therapeutic supports in acute settings and being treated with dignity and respect.
A review of recovery/care plans commenced to support individual care planning including the training needs of staff and service users.
Development of a stepped model of care is underway to establish clear mental healthcare pathways into and between primary care, addiction services and specialist mental health services for those who are homeless in Community Healthcare East, Dublin South, Kildare and West Wicklow Community Healthcare and Midlands Louth Meath Community Healthcare.
This should ensure timely access and appropriate mental healthcare to meet their mental health needs.
Significant progress was made in advancing the development of digital mental health supports, including piloting of initiatives to improve access to counselling on-line, establishment of a telephone-based YourMentalHealth information line and Crisis Text Line Ireland.
Other initiatives include piloting internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy interventions and remote psychiatric consultations (tele-psychiatry).
Promoting positive mental health •
Enhancement of primary care-based services –
Implementation of Clinical Programmes •
Eating disorder specialist community teams were developed in both adult services and CAMHS.
The aim is for 16 teams to be established across the country and to date three teams are in place.
Community Healthcare
The model of care for the treatment of eating disorders in Ireland continued to be rolled out.
The PiLaR programme supports families affected by eating disorders.
An independent evaluation of the programme, undertaken by University College Dublin (UCD) in collaboration with service users, clinicians, family members and friends confirms that the programme is a valued source of information and support to those supporting a person with an eating disorder.
To date over 600 family members and friends have attended the free, four-week programme gaining information, education and support.
Suicide prevention
Connecting for Life, Ireland’s National Strategy to Reduce Suicide 2015-2020 sets out a vision of an Ireland where fewer lives are lost through suicide and communities and individuals are empowered to improve their mental health and wellbeing.
During 2019: •
The interim strategy review of Connecting for Life was completed.
The National Office for Suicide Prevention Annual Report 2018 was launched, highlighting developments related to the on-going implementation of Connecting for Life.
A key focal point was the improved provision of free, evidence informed suicide and self-harm training in communities nationwide.
Connecting for Life National Education and Training Plan 2019-2020 was published and will build the capacity of government departments, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), community organisations, groups and individuals to identify and respond appropriately to people at risk of suicide and self-harm.
In partnership with the Irish Hospice Foundation, the first train-the-trainer programme in suicide postvention was held in May for staff who support those bereaved by suicide, to provide them with a greater understanding of the grieving process, demonstrating the value of empathy, compassion and humanity.
Further workshops took place in June within the community
The report, Improving Suicide Bereavement Supports in Ireland, was finalised and it contains 21 actions for implementation.
Disability Services
Transforming Lives – reform programme to move towards community-based, person-centred models of care •
As part of the implementation of Towards Personalised Budgets for People with a Disability in Ireland – Report of the Task Force on Personalised Budgets a number of demonstration projects were progressed.
The personalised budgets model will give people with disabilities more control in accessing health funded personal social services, giving them greater independence and choice in accessing services which best meet their individual needs.
It is anticipated that 180 participants will participate in the project.
Time to move on from congregated settings – A Strategy for Community Inclusion •
from Congregated Settings – A Strategy for Community Inclusion.
In 2019, 103 people transitioned from institutional settings to residential homes with on-going support in their community.
Compliance with residential regulations of centres inspected by HIQA •
Work progressed with a number of designated residential centres to provide support in developing compliance plans for HIQA registration due for renewal during the year.
Engagement with service users
A number of service user engagements with many disability service providers were held during the year and a Governance Review Group was established with service user representation.
New Directions – improving day services to enable people to have choice and options about how they live their lives and how they spend their time •
A new e-learning resource for staff supporting people with a disability attending day services, was launched.
It was developed with input from service users, family members, staff, mainstream community services and employers.
The module which is available on HSELanD will support almost 6,000 staff in 1,000 day service locations across the county illustrating positive outcomes for people enabling access to mainstream services in the community, achieving employment and becoming valued team members.
• The national framework for person-centred planning focuses the delivery of services and supports on the person and how they want to live their life.
The learning from these demonstration sites will be used to inform a process for the wider implementation of this framework for all adults with disabilities.
facilities opened across the CHOs providing 12 new houses, one in each CHO and three in the greater Dublin area.
During 2019, 12 new additional centre-based respite centres have opened to date, resulting in an additional 6,455 bed nights delivered to 763 people.
Neuro-Rehabilitation Strategy
Implementing the Review of the Irish Health Services for Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders • A person with a lived experience was selected to sit on the Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Programme board.
Services for children and young people ensuring one clear pathway of services •
90 additional therapy posts were put in place to support assessment of need services. •
As part of the reconfiguration of 0-18s disability services into children’s disability network teams the recruitment process for children’s disability network managers was completed.
This is enabling implementation of the network teams aligned with the planned 96 CHNs.
Respite support for those with disabilities and their families •
The National Strategy and Policy for the provision of Neuro-Rehabilitation Services in Ireland from Theory to Action Implementation Framework 2019-2021 was launched.
The aim is to improve patient outcomes by configuring neuro-rehabilitation services into population based managed clinical rehabilitation networks (MCRN).
The pilot project in Community Healthcare East and Dublin South, Kildare and West Wicklow Community Healthcare will see the introduction of the first MCRN.
To support this, policies, procedures and agreed care pathways were developed.
Respite care supports families to help reduce stress, providing stability.
It also provides people with disabilities with opportunities for interaction with new people, widening their social circle. During 2019 additional –
The identification of a standardised assessment/ pathway approach for use in all services dealing with the assessment of those with autism
– Building awareness of the autistic community and the services and supports available.
Older Persons’ Services
Providing the appropriate supports to those being discharged from acute hospitals, focusing on delayed discharges •
Home support services support older people in their choice of living within their own home and community.
As part of winter planning, an additional 410,000 home support hours were provided to enhance service delivery during the winter months (including 550 home support packages).
Additional funding of €2m was provided on a once-off basis in October to provide a further 1,100 home support packages to support 510 people leaving hospital and 600 home support packages to support the provision of community home supports.
Through the transitional care scheme 11,094 people were supported to move from acute hospitals to private nursing homes while waiting for their NHSS application to be finalised or for a period of convalescence up to four weeks to support their return home.
To support those leaving hospital and to continue their care and assessment for longer term needs in the most appropriate community setting, work has commenced on developing a discharge to assess protocol.
Statutory home support scheme and regulation •
A joint programme of work between the DoH and the HSE, for the design and development of a statutory home support scheme and regulation was established and work is being progressed along four work-streams: –
A reformed model of service delivery
A sustainable funding model
A service commissioning model
Options for regulation of service providers.
Improving services and supports for people with dementia
Implementation of The Irish National Dementia Strategy 2014 progressed with a focus on developing care pathways across all care settings, and implementing flexible and personalised approaches to care. •
• The Continuum of Care Report for People Living with Dementia In Ireland was published in 2019.
This report reviewed models of long-term care and provides recommendations to support the future development of both residential and home-based care for people with dementia. •
The final evaluation reports from the HSE/Genio-supported dementia specific initiatives which focused on personalised and flexible approaches to care were published.
The learning from this programme will inform the review of homecare services and the delivery of home supports. •
Following the success of the Understand Together campaign at the Bloom Festival in 2018, Memories are Made of This was the 1950s themed show garden for 2019 which focused on reminiscence, highlighting the importance and value of what is remembered and not what is forgotten.
There are now over 40 national partners and almost 300 community activation champions working to increase awareness on how everyone can play a role in making communities inclusive.
The number of memory technology resource rooms in the community increased to 26, supporting people who are living at home by providing information and advice for those who may have concerns about themselves or a loved one with memory impairment or a diagnosis of dementia.
The roll-out of the carers’ needs assessment module is being progressed.
Implementation of the interRAI Ireland System •
The procurement of a new software vendor for the assessment system was progressed and a successful vendor was awarded.
As part of the Post Diagnostic Support Programme, guidance on psycho-education for people with dementia at the post-diagnostic stage was published.
• interRAI assessments were conducted in over 30 acute and community locations across Ireland resulting in care needs assessment of over 6,000 older people. •
Palliative Care Services
As part of its roll-out, the development of a new palliative care In partnership with primary care services, the Clinical Nurse Co-ordinators for Life Limiting Conditions lead the development of the new HSE National Patient – Held Folder for Children and Young People called My Story.
The folder shares both clinical and personal information relevant to the patient with professionals in both the acute and community settings.
Supporting implementation of the Integrated Care Programme for Older Persons
Palliative care focuses on helping people of all ages to live well with an illness that is life-limiting and to achieve the best quality of life as their illness progresses.
Improving palliative care services for patients and families facing life-limiting illnesses
Three new palliative care inpatient units were completed in Waterford, Mayo and Wicklow and are due to open in 2020.
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Services
Acute services play a key role in improving the health of the population by providing essential services including prehospital care, emergency care, urgent care, scheduled care, trauma care, surgery and critical care. •
Work is on-going through the national clinical programmes and with community services to develop diagnostic services with a particular focus on winter planning.
An additional 75 beds were opened under the Winter Plan.
Six high dependency beds and one intensive care unit bed were opened in the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, along with the phased opening of seven transplant assessment beds.
The Emergency Medicine Early Warning System (EMEWS) went live in Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital, Drogheda and the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital in December.
Further sites are scheduled to commence in early 2020.
A new regulation came into operation in 2019 to help enhance patient safety by protecting the pharmaceutical supply chain from infiltration by falsified (or counterfeit) medicines.
The European Commission’s Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161 for Safety Features on Medicinal Products for Human Use is being implemented to ensure an end-to-end verification system is in place in acute hospitals.
A number of national clinical guidelines were developed or updated including: –
Clinical guidelines on the national early warning score (NEWS)
Clinical guidelines on the appropriate prescribing of psychotropic medication for non-cognitive symptoms in people with dementia.
Improving access to scheduled (planned) and unscheduled (unplanned) care •
Developing and improving national specialist services •
Implementation of recommendations in relation to the Department of Health Policy Review: Sexual Assault Treatment Units continued.
Acute services and the NTPF worked with designated sites to improve access to bariatric surgery and weight management services.
All-Island Cardiology –
An additional paediatric intensive care unit (PICU) bed opened in Children’s Health Ireland (CHI) at Crumlin in October with the full complement of 25 additional PICU beds scheduled to be on stream by early 2020.
Improving integration between community and acute services to promote a modernised and streamlined service model in line with Sláintecare •
Work continued on the development of integrated service provision through outreach services, telemedicine, virtual clinics and cross-sector working.
Work commenced on the development of scheduled care community based initiatives.
Work continued in the acute hospitals on the on-going implementation of Healthy Ireland plans.
Implementation of the MECC Framework continued as a key enabler in promoting life style behavioural change among service users.
Engagement with SMS co-ordinators continued to support chronic disease prevention and SMS strategies.
Staff were supported and encouraged to engage with initiatives and campaigns, including resilience training, to improve their own health and wellbeing in the hospital workplace.
National communication campaigns were rolled out in hospitals, reinforcing positive health messages for both service users and staff.
Tobacco Free Campuses were promoted in all acute hospital settings.
Improving performance management of operational services
Work continued to embed the Consultant Contract Compliance Framework in 2019, and improvements were made in relation to the consistency of applications of the framework.
Supporting the development of eHealth capability •
Further progress was made on the development and implementation of key eHealth programmes including the delivery of an Integrated Patient Management System for CHI and the preparation of acute hospital IT systems for the population of the Individual Health Identifier (IHI).
On-going eHealth projects were supported, such as the National Medical Laboratory Information System, the Acute Floor Information System, the National Integrated Medical Imaging System, and the Maternal and Newborn Clinical Management System.
Supporting the progress of policies and initiatives led by the Office of the Chief Nursing Officer •
The roll-out and implementation of the Framework for Safe Nurse Staffing and Skill Mix in General and Specialist Medical and Surgical Care Settings in Adult Hospitals in Ireland 2018 continued and work commenced on phase two of the framework (in emergency care settings).
Trauma Strategy
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Services
Improvements in outcomes for patients can be achieved by providing patient-focused and planned trauma care. A Trauma System for Ireland – Report of the Trauma Steering Group recommended the introduction of an inclusive trauma system for Ireland with one Major Trauma Centre to be based in Dublin servicing the Central Trauma Network, and another to be based in Cork University Hospital servicing the South Trauma Network.
The trauma system will link the Major Trauma Centres, Trauma Units, local emergency hospitals and injury units into networks of trauma care that will also include pre-hospital care and rehabilitation.
A key action from the Trauma Strategy is to designate the Major Trauma Centre for the Central Trauma Network and this was progressed by developing a designation framework of service specifications, options and assessment criteria.
The framework was the subject of a public consultation.
The revised framework was used by an Independent Assessment Panel to review submissions from six Dublin hospitals identified as options for the Major Trauma Centre and Dublin Trauma Units.
The panel will provide advice to the HSE in early 2020 on the hospitals to be designated as the Major Trauma Centre for the Central Trauma Network and Dublin Trauma Units and the HSE will make a recommendation to the Minister.
The appointment of a National Clinical Lead for Trauma Services in June, one of the immediate actions prioritised in the report, will provide an essential foundation for the implementation and oversight of the new trauma system.
Cancer Services
The key focus in progressing cancer services in 2019 was the continued implementation of the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026.
The strategy sets out four key priorities: reduce the cancer burden; provide optimal care; maximise patient involvement and quality of life; and enable and assure change.
Reducing the cancer burden • 
The plan is aimed at tackling the most common type of cancer in Ireland.
The Plan focuses on the fact that most skin cancers could be prevented and has identified the priority groups as children, outdoor workers, those who participate in outdoor leisure activities and sunbed users.
The Irish Cancer Prevention Network was established by the National Cancer Control Programme (NCCP), Marie Keating Foundation, Irish Cancer Society and Breakthrough Cancer Research.
The network encourages collaborative working with the aim of reducing cancer risk for the population.
Establishment of an early detection Board progressed with three meetings held.
Implementation Report on National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026 The first implementation report on the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026 was published, setting out the progress achieved on the 52 recommendations of the strategy.
The report found that significant progress has been made since the launch of the strategy, with key highlights including: •
Integration of cancer prevention into the messaging under Healthy Ireland
Uptake rates for cancer screening
Publication of a model of care for oral anti-cancer medications
Progress being made by Working Groups on survivorship and psycho-oncology
Ensuring appropriate staff are in place remains a challenge for the specialist cancer workforce.
However, key appointments continue to be made to ensure better, safer services for our patients
The pilot phase for the New Cancer Framework for Quality and Safety concluded during the year, with next steps including its national roll-out for lung cancer.
Additional information on other key highlights can be found further in this section.
Women and Children’s Services
National Women and Infants’ Health Programme
Ireland’s first National Maternity Strategy
Creating a Better Future Together was launched in 2016.
The strategy sets out a blueprint to significantly improve the service provided to mothers and their babies, and its implementation is a key focus for the health service.
During the year, work progressed to address the priorities of the strategy and examples of this can be seen below.
A particular focus was assigned to the supported care pathway.
This pathway, identified as the least developed across maternity services, is intended for pregnancies deemed to be normal-risk where care is primarily delivered by midwives working within a multi-disciplinary framework.
A baseline review of maternity services was conducted and completed.
This review found that 10% to 35% of women were now being managed within the supported care pathway during the antenatal period, across 16 maternity hospitals/units.
The review also identified that women in the supported care pathway engage in a shared model of care with their GP.
15 of the 16 services had a community based presence of which 10 provided booking in clinics in the community.
Each maternity network is at a different level of development.
During 2019 advances were made across each but further work on their development is required.
Currently, maternity networks also provide other services including termination of pregnancy, general gynaecology (including creating capacity for colposcopy clinics), and fertility services.
Work is also underway to transition the home birth service into the maternity networks, further emphasising the important role the maternity networks play across primary and secondary care, as well as health and wellbeing.
Fourteen maternity units/hospitals now provide women with a 20-week foetal anomaly scan, and a fifteenth site provides the scan but at a later stage in pregnancy.
The remaining four units are working towards full provision as posts are filled and capacity grows on the ground.
A national plan for ambulatory gynaecology was developed.
The aim of the plan is to increase the capacity in the area of general gynaecology, with the objective of reducing waiting times for women, which is inclusive of patients with endometriosis.
The plan aims to re-orient general gynaecology services to an ambulatory (see and treat) care model rather than the traditional care model of outpatient referral to day case/inpatient procedure.
A Clinical Lead for Termination of Pregnancy services was appointed at the end of 2019.
Further information can be seen on page [49] of this Annual Report.
Paediatric Model of Care
Continuing to oversee the new children’s hospital development and development of paediatric services •
In January 2019, the three children’s hospitals in Dublin and the Children’s Hospital Group transitioned from four separate, independently governed entities into one new single organisation, CHI.
The new Paediatric Outpatient and Urgent Care Centre at Connolly Hospital opened in July, providing a range of services.
The Urgent Care Centre treats minor injuries or illnesses that require prompt treatment, but are not life threatening.
The Paediatric Outpatient Department is expected to see up to 17,000 children a year, once fully operational and should contribute to significant reductions in waiting lists.
In its first five months of opening the general paediatric waiting list fell by 38%.
The Centre also contains a HSE Dental Unit and Child Sexual Abuse Assessment and Treatment Unit.
The HSE continued to work with the DoH, CHI and the National Paediatric Hospital Development Board to progress the opening of the second Urgent Care Centre at Tallaght and the new Children’s Hospital.
Further development of the regional paediatric units in CUH, University Hospital Galway (UHG) and University Hospital Limerick (UHL) through the recruitment of additional paediatric consultants will aid the implementation of one of the key concepts of the National Model of Care for Paediatric Healthcare Services which is to provide care as close to the patient’s home as is clinically appropriate.
A €1.2m capital investment project saw the Cardiac Risk in the Young (CRY) Unit at CHI move to a larger purpose built outpatient facility in September.
The treatment of CRY involves the comprehensive evaluation and treatment of those diagnosed with, or at risk from, inherited heart conditions that are a leading cause of sudden cardiac death in the young.
Additional staff were recruited to support additional services in CHI including: – Rheumatology services – Haematology stem cell service – Outpatient antibiotic therapy – Neurosurgery services.
Scoliosis services continued to be developed to reduce access waiting times for surgery.
National Ambulance Service Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Services
The National Ambulance Service (NAS) is the statutory pre-hospital emergency and intermediate care provider for the State.
In the Dublin metropolitan area, ambulance services which are funded by the HSE are provided by the NAS and Dublin Fire Brigade.
The NAS responds to emergency and urgent calls, transports intermediate care patients and undertakes adult, paediatric and neonatal retrievals.
Supporting the Sláintecare Implementation Strategy
Work has continued to support and expand community first responder schemes with over 260 community first responder groups and over 4,000 community volunteers now in place throughout the country.
The NAS Critical Care Retrieval Service held its inaugural symposium in June.
The theme of the symposium was Connectivity in Critical Illness and there was excellent representation from all areas of the health service, the DoH and from the Northern Ireland Retrieval Service.
The NAS in partnership with mental health services initiated a new YourMentalHealth information phone line in October to provide information on mental health supports and services across the country.
Operating 24/7, the Freephone number is 1800 742 444 informing service users on the local supports and services available and how to access them.
In preparation for the phone line going live, the NAS call takers received additional training from mental health professionals to assist them in signposting the most appropriate service.
Implementation of A Trauma System for Ireland – Report of the Trauma Steering Group
A service level agreement was reached between the HSE and Irish Community Rapid Response to provide an aeromedical service from Rathcoole Aerodrome near Millstreet in Co. Cork.
The service went live in July 2019.
Trauma and orthopaedic bypass protocols were implemented from Portiuncula to Galway and from Naas to Tallaght.
Delivery of improved governance and patient safety
Work on the implementation of the NAS Fleet and Equipment Plan continued.
This included the procurement of new special purpose, specially adapted vehicles which allow the NAS to be winter ready.
These vehicles are four-wheel drive and will assist in the delivery of pre-hospital care during adverse weather conditions.
A NAS Business and Data Analysis team has been established to strengthen clinical governance.
The team will support the analysis of clinical information assisting in understanding patient demographics, treatments provided, etc. in a more timely manner.
The Emergency Motorcycle Response Unit was launched in Cork City.
This unit provides a rapid response to serious and life threatening 112/999 calls and is able to manoeuvre more quickly through heavy traffic or difficult to access areas to stabilise the patient before ambulance arrival.
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Services
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Enabling Healthcare Delivery Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Office of Chief Information Officer
The Office of the Chief Information Officer delivers ICT services and support throughout the HSE, facilitating integration within and across community services, hospitals and other specialised care providers.
In 2019, the ICT capital allocation was €85m.
Some key projects were progressed which advanced implementation of Sláintecare.
The Individual Health Identifier (IHI) enables the identification of patients and clients availing of health services and their health records and is critical for eHealth and Electronic Health Records (EHRs).
The IHI is operated by the Health Identifier Service, which was formally established this year as part of Sláintecare.
The technical infrastructure supporting the IHI Register, originally populated in 2017 with 6.7m records, has been operational since 2017 and is providing IHI numbers for 8,000 electronic transactions per day.
A programme of work was completed in 2019 to enhance and improve the IHI’s record matching capability.
To date IHI numbers have been created for 8m individuals in Ireland.
A foundational programme to guide staff through utilising the digital tools they already have access to and to build on their digital literacy skills was launched in conjunction with Health Business Services (HBS) and in collaboration with the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment.
Its aims are to inspire and encourage staff to become confident on-line by working on existing digital platforms and services along with fostering valuable partnerships in supporting digital transformation.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
4,500 devices (laptops, desktops) and 3,900 smartphones have been delivered to front line community-based staff, including public health nurses, physiotherapists, speech and language therapists, dental staff, dieticians etc.
This was a national project and included all nine CHOs.
Communications technology upgrades were undertaken to support existing and new community sites including 18 fixed telephony upgrades, 20 new builds and over 50 network connections.
The Maternal and Newborn Clinical Management System Project is the design and implementation of an EHR for all women and babies in maternity and neonatology services in Ireland.
This record allows patient information to be shared with relevant providers of care, in a standardised format, as and when required through the use of a technology enabled solution.
The inaugural Digital Academy Forum was held in September 2019.
These Forums will be held quarterly and are a place for sharing and shaping thought and practice on digital health issues, digital transformation and innovations across the health service by medical staff, academics, industry leaders, patients and citizens.
National Human Resources
Developing a new People Strategy •
The development process for the new People Strategy was completed following a comprehensive consultation process.
Work continued to implement People’s Needs Defining Change – Health Services Change Guide through a focus on communication and awareness, education and practice development, synergy at national level and change practice improvement within the delivery system.
The Health Services Change Guide is the policy framework and agreed approach to change for the health service and is a key foundation for delivering the people and culture change required to implement Sláintecare, public sector reform and corporate priorities.
A review of the existing Recruitment Model was carried out.
Initial work has commenced on this model and is expected to be completed in 2020. •
The Health Service Leadership Academy delivered one cohort of each of the flagship leadership development programmes, Leading Care I, Leading Care II and Leading Care III.
The Health Service Leadership Academy HSE won the national award for the best Learning and Development Strategy at the HR Leadership and Management Awards.
An Action Plan was developed in response to the results of the 2018 staff survey findings.
This document defines staff engagement, highlights the benefits for staff and patients of having an engaged workforce, and emphasises that staff engagement is a core component in developing policies and strategies.
The implementation of a single National Integrated Staff Records and Payroll (NiSRP) system is currently being rolled out nationally.
The programme went live in the East and plans are at an advanced stage for implementation in the South East in May 2020.
A National Steering Group, co-chaired by Quality Improvement and National HR, is in place to oversee the implementation of the Linking Service and Safety Strategy which addresses work related violence and aggression.
A status update on this strategy is currently underway.
The Healthy Workplace Framework will focus on the physical, psychosocial and personal health of staff in the workplace.
Work commenced during the year on the development of a resource pack to provide information for managers and their staff on developing a healthy workplace including the supports/resources available to support implementation.
The Healthy Workplace Framework is expected to be launched in 2020.
Critical incident stress management training is on-going nationally with three training sessions, covering 32 newly trained staff, and 12 in-service supervision training days undertaken.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Sites that were integrated include: –
In partnership with the Sláintecare Programme Implementation Office, work was undertaken on the HSE Digital Roadmap to transform the on-line user experience.
Over 30 stand-alone websites, micro-sites and content collections have been integrated with the new hse.ie.
HSELive received 182,000 contacts during the year, by email, phone and web chat.
Mr Liam Woods (National Director, Acute Operations)
Mr David Walsh (National Director, Community Operations)
Mr John Hennessy (National Director, Acute Strategy and Planning)
Mr Pat Healy (National Director, Community Strategy and Planning)
Dr Stephanie O’Keeffe (National Director, Strategic Planning and Transformation)
Mr John Swords (National Director, Health Business Services)
Ms Fiona Bonas (National Director, National Cancer Control Programme)
Mr Patrick Lynch (National Director, Quality Assurance and Verification)
Dr Philip Crowley (National Director, Quality Improvement)
Mr Damien McCallion (National Director, Screening Services and CAWT)
Mr Joe Ryan (National Director, National Services incl. VIP, GDPR)
Mr Shaun Flanagan (Head of PCRS)
Mr Martin Dunne (Head of National Ambulance Service)
Community Healthcare Organisations Chief Officers •
Mr John Hayes (Donegal, Sligo Leitrim, Cavan Monaghan)
Mr Martin Greaney (Community Healthcare West)
Ms Maria Bridgeman (Mid West Community Healthcare)
Mr Ger Reaney (Cork Kerry Community Healthcare)
Ms Kate Killeen White (South East Community Healthcare)
Ms Martina Queally (Community Healthcare East)
Ms Ann O’Shea (Dublin South, Kildare and West Wicklow Community Healthcare)
Mr Pat Bennett (Midlands Louth Community Healthcare)
Ms Mellany McLoone (Dublin North City and County Community Healthcare)
Children’s Hospital Ireland and Hospital Groups Chief Executive Officers
Ms Eilish Hardiman (Children’s Health Ireland)
Mr Trevor O’Callaghan (Dublin Midlands Hospital Group)
Mr Tony Canavan (Saolta University Health Care Group)
Professor Mary Day (Ireland East Hospital Group)
National Director Screening Services and CAWT
National Director Quality Improvement
National Director Quality Assurance and Verification
Chief Information Officer
Chief Clinical Officer
People and Culture
Children’s Health Ireland Chief Executive Officer
Head of National Ambulance Service
HSE Board
Minister for Health
Chief Executive Officer
National Director Community Operations
Chief Operations Officer
National Director Acute Operations
National Director Communications
National Director Internal Audit
Community Healthcare Organisations Chief Officers
Hospital Group
Performance and Delivery
Audit and Risk
Board Committees
Head of PCRS
National Director National Services
Chief Financial Officer
National Director Community Strategy and Planning
National Director Acute Strategy and Planning
National Director Human Resources
Respect and Dignity % of staff who complete the HSELanD Respect and Dignity at Work module
SENIOR LEADERSHIP TEAM
EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT TEAM
Head of Corporate Affairs
National Director Health Business Services
Appendix 3
Reported
Actual 2018
Performance Achievement % of staff who have engaged with and completed a performance achievement meeting with his/her line manager
Quality and Safety
System Wide Service User Experience % of complaints investigated within 30 working days of being acknowledged by the complaints officer Serious Incidents % of serious incidents being notified within 24 hours of occurrence to the senior accountable officer % of serious incidents requiring review completed within 125 calendar days of occurrence of the incident Incident Reporting
* Target NSP 2019 reflects an affordable limit (excluding nationally and DoH held service developments) ** Outturn 2018 revised following a data validation exercise *** Due to impact of COVID-19, this data is not available at this time **** Data is in respect of Jan-Oct 2019 with full year data being available May 2020 Reported
Actual 2018
Target
NSP 2019
Reported
Actual 2019
% Variance from Target 2019
% of children aged 24 months who have received three doses of the 6 in 1 vaccine
% of children aged 24 months who have received the measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine
% of first year girls who have received two doses of HPV vaccine
% of healthcare workers who have received seasonal Flu vaccine in the 2018-2019 influenza season (acute hospitals)
% of healthcare workers who have received seasonal Flu vaccine in the 2018-2019 influenza season (long-term care facilities in the community)
% uptake in Flu vaccine for those aged 65 and older with a medical card or GP visit card
Indicator
Population Health and Wellbeing
Tobacco
Immunisations and Vaccines
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Target
NSP 2019
Reported
Actual 2019
% Variance from Target 2019
% BreastCheck screening uptake rate
% of women offered hospital admission for treatment within three weeks of diagnosis of breast cancer
Appendix 3
Indicators
National Screening Service
CervicalCheck % of eligible women with at least one satisfactory CervicalCheck screening in a five year period BowelScreen % of client uptake rate in the BowelScreen programme Diabetic RetinaScreen % Diabetic RetinaScreen uptake rate
Nursing Community Healthcare
% of new patients accepted onto the nursing caseload and seen within 12 weeks
Physiotherapy
Occupational Therapy
Speech and Language Therapy
Podiatry
Ophthalmology
Audiology
Appendix 3
Reported
Actual 2018
Dietetics
Psychology
Oral Health % of new patients who commenced treatment within three months of scheduled oral health assessment Orthodontics % of patients seen for assessment within six months
Community Healthcare
% of orthodontic patients (grades 4 and 5) on the treatment waiting list longer than four years Child Health
Social Inclusion Services
Opioid Substitution
Average waiting time from referral to assessment for opioid substitution treatment
Average waiting time from opioid substitution assessment to exit from waiting list or treatment commenced
Homeless Services % of service users admitted to homeless emergency accommodation hostels/facilities whose health needs have been assessed within two weeks of admission Substance Misuse
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks by General Adult Community Mental Health Team
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks by General Adult Community Mental Health Team
% of new (including re-referred) General Adult Community Mental Health Team cases offered appointment and DNA in the current month
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks by Psychiatry of Later Life Community Mental Health Teams
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks by Psychiatry of Later Life Community Mental Health Teams
Admissions of children to Child and Adolescent Acute Inpatient Units as a % of the total no. of admissions of children to mental health acute inpatient units
% of bed days used in HSE Child and Adolescent Acute Inpatient Units as a total of bed days used by children in mental health acute inpatient units
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks by Child and Adolescent Community Mental Health Teams
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks by Child and Adolescent Community Mental Health Teams
New PI NSP 2019
Reporting to commence in 2019
Appendix 3 Indicators
Mental Health Services General Adult Community Mental Health Teams
Community Healthcare
Psychiatry of Later Life Community Mental Health Teams Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
% of preliminary screenings for adults aged 65 years and over with an outcome of reasonable grounds for concern that are submitted to the safeguarding and protection teams accompanied by an interim safeguarding plan
% of preliminary screenings for adults under 65 years with an outcome of reasonable grounds for concern that are submitted to the safeguarding and protection teams accompanied by an interim safeguarding plan
Day Services including School Leavers % of school leavers and rehabilitation training (RT) graduates who have been provided with a placement Disability Act Compliance % of child assessments completed within the timelines as provided for in the regulations
Progressing Disability Services for Children and Young People (0-18s) Programme % of Children’s Disability Network Teams established
100% 0.0%
-100.0%
% of preliminary screenings for adults aged 65 years and over with an outcome of reasonable grounds for concern that are submitted to the safeguarding and protection teams accompanied by an interim safeguarding plan
% of preliminary screenings for adults under 65 years with an outcome of reasonable grounds for concern that are submitted to the safeguarding and protection teams accompanied by an interim safeguarding plan
New PI NSP 2019
% of clients with NHSS who are in receipt of ancillary state support
% of clients who have Common Summary Assessment Reports (CSARs) processed within six weeks
Access to specialist inpatient bed within seven days during the reporting year
% of patients triaged within one working day of referral (inpatient unit)
Access to specialist palliative care services in the community provided within seven days (normal place of residence)
% of patients triaged within one working day of referral (community)
Safeguarding (combined KPIs with Disability Services) Residential Care % occupancy of short stay beds to commence Q3 2019 Quality % of compliance with regulations following HIQA inspection of HSE direct-provided Older Persons’ Residential Services Intensive Homecare Packages (IHCPs) % of clients in receipt of an IHCP with a key worker assigned Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS)
Palliative Care Services
Inpatient Palliative Care Services
Community Palliative Care Services
% of adults waiting <15 months for an elective procedure (inpatient)
% of people waiting <52 weeks for first access to OPD services
% of all attendees at ED who are discharged or admitted within six hours of registration
% of all attendees at ED who are discharged or admitted within nine hours of registration
% of all attendees at ED who are in ED <24 hours
% of all attendees aged 75 years and over at ED who are discharged or admitted within six hours of registration
% of medical patients who are discharged or admitted from AMAU within six hours AMAU registration
% of all medical admissions via AMAU
% of emergency re-admissions for acute medical conditions to the same hospital within 30 days of discharge
Acute Hospital Care Colonoscopy/Gastrointestinal Service % of people waiting <13 weeks following a referral for routine colonoscopy or OGD No. of people waiting > four weeks for access to an urgent colonoscopy Emergency Care and Patient Experience Time % of ED patients who leave before completion of treatment
Length of Stay
ALOS for all inpatient discharges excluding LOS over 30 days
Medical patient average length of stay
% of elective surgical inpatients who had principal procedure conducted on day of admission
% day case rate for Elective Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy
New PI NSP 2019
Rate of new cases of hospital acquired Staph.
Aureus bloodstream infection
<1/10,000 bed days used
Rate of new cases of hospital acquired C. difficile infection
<2/10,000 bed days used
% of acute hospitals implementing the requirements for screening of patients with CPE guidelines
% of acute hospitals implementing the national policy on restricted antimicrobial agents
Surgery Surgical patient average length of stay
Appendix 3
Reported
Actual 2018
Acute Hospital Care
Healthcare Associated Infections (HCAI)
Medication Safety
Rate of medication incidents as reported to NIMS per 1,000 beds
National Early Warning System (NEWS) % of hospitals with implementation of NEWS in all clinical areas of acute hospitals (as per 2019 definition) % of hospitals with implementation of PEWS (Paediatric Early Warning System)
National Standards % of hospitals that have completed a self-assessment against all 53 essential elements of the National Standards for Safer, Better Healthcare % of acute hospitals which have completed and published monthly hospital patient safety indicator report Stroke % acute stroke patients who spend all or some of their hospital stay in an acute or combined stroke unit % of patients with confirmed acute ischaemic stroke who receive thrombolysis % of hospital stay for acute stroke patients in stroke unit who are admitted to an acute or combined stroke unit Acute Coronary Syndrome
Appendix 3
Indicator
National Women and Infants Health Programme (NWIHP) Irish Maternity Early Warning System (IMEWS)
Cancer Services
% of new patients attending rapid access breast, lung and prostate clinics within recommended timeframe Symptomatic Breast Disease Services Non-urgent % of attendances whose referrals were triaged as non-urgent by the cancer centre and adhered to the national standard of 12 weeks for non-urgent referrals (% offered an appointment that falls within 12 weeks) Clinical Detection Rate – breast cancer % of new attendances to the rapid access clinic, triaged as urgent, that have a subsequent primary diagnosis of breast cancer
Clinical Detection Rate – lung cancer % of new attendances to the rapid access clinic that have a subsequent primary diagnosis of lung cancer Clinical Detection Rate – prostate cancer % of new attendances to the rapid access clinic that have a subsequent primary diagnosis of prostate cancer Radiotherapy
National Ambulance Service % of patients undergoing radical radiotherapy treatment who commenced treatment within 15 working days of being deemed ready to treat by the radiation oncologist (palliative care patients not included)
% of clinical status 1 ECHO incidents responded to by a patient-carrying vehicle in 18 minutes and 59 seconds or less
% of ECHO calls which had a resource allocated within 90 seconds of call start
% of clinical status 1 DELTA incidents responded to by a patient-carrying vehicle in 18 minutes and 59 seconds or less
% of DELTA calls which have a resource allocated within 90 seconds of call start
% of completed medical card/GP visit card applications processed within 15 days
% of medical card/GP visit card applications, assigned for medical officer review, processed within five days
% of medical card/GP visit card applications which are accurately processed from a financial perspective by National Medical Card Unit staff
Indicator
Emergency Response Times
Appendix 3
Reported
Actual 2018
Intermediate Care Service % of all transfers provided through the intermediate care service
Ambulance Turnaround % of ambulance turnaround delays escalated where ambulance crews were not cleared nationally (from ambulance arrival time through clinical handover in ED or specialist unit to when the ambulance crew declares readiness of the ambulance to accept another call) in line with the process/flow path in the ambulance turnaround framework within: • 30 minutes • 60 minutes Indicator PCRS Medical Cards
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Appendix 3(b) Volume Activity 2019 Appendix 3
No. of test purchases carried out under the Public Health (Sunbeds) Act 2014
No. of mystery shopper inspections carried out under the Public Health (Sunbeds) Act 2014
Environmental Health
Population Health and Wellbeing
No. of official food control planned, and planned surveillance, inspections of food businesses No. of inspections of e-cigarette and refill container manufacturers, importers, distributors and retailers under E.U.
(Manufacture, Presentation and Sale of Tobacco and Related Products) Regulations 2016 Tobacco
Chronic Disease Management
No. of people who have completed a structured patient education programme for type 2 diabetes Public Health
No. of infectious disease (ID) outbreaks notified under the national ID reporting schedule Making Every Contact Count
No. of frontline staff to complete the eLearning Making Every Contact Count training in brief intervention No. of frontline staff to complete the face to face module of Making Every Contact Count training in brief intervention
National Screening Service
* Expected Activity revised from 295 to 242 in May 2019 ** Data is in relation to January to September 2019 and so an end of year variance is not appropriate for inclusion *** Expected Activity revised from 11,000 to 6,500 in May 2019
National Screening Service BreastCheck
No. of women in the eligible population who have had a complete mammogram
No. of unique women who have had one or more smear tests in a primary care setting
Community Healthcare
Nursing
Physiotherapy
Occupational Therapy
Speech and Language Therapy
Podiatry
Ophthalmology
Audiology
Dietetics
No. of people who received information on type 2 diabetes or participated in related initiatives
No. of people who received information on cardiovascular health or participated in related initiatives
No. of adult referrals seen by mental health services
No. of admissions to adult acute inpatient units
Psychology
Orthodontics
National Virus Reference Laboratory No. of tests
Social Inclusion Services
Opioid Substitution
No. of clients in receipt of opioid substitution treatment (outside prisons)
Needle Exchange
Community Healthcare
No. of unique individuals attending pharmacy needle exchange
Homeless Services
No. of service users admitted to homeless emergency accommodation hostels/facilities whose health needs have been assessed within two weeks of admission Traveller Health
Substance Misuse
Mental Health Services
General Adult Community Mental Health Teams
Psychiatry of Later Life Community Mental Health Teams No. of Psychiatry of Later Life referrals seen by mental health services Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
No. of people with a disability in receipt of work/ work-like activity services (ID/autism and physical and sensory disability)
No. of people (all disabilities) in receipt of rehabilitation training (RT)
Residential Places
No. of residential places for people with a disability New Emergency Places Provided to People with a Disability No. of new emergency places provided to people with a disability
Congregated Settings
Facilitate the movement of people from congregated to community settings
Community Healthcare
Day Services including School Leavers
Respite Services
No. of day only respite sessions accessed by people with a disability
No. of people with a disability in receipt of respite services (ID/autism and physical and sensory disability) No. of overnights (with or without day respite) accessed by people with a disability Personal Assistance (PA)
No. of PA service hours delivered to adults with a physical and/or sensory disability No. of adults with a physical and/or sensory disability in receipt of a PA service
Home Support Service
No. of home support hours delivered to persons with a disability
No. of people with a disability in receipt of home support services (ID/autism and physical and sensory disability) Disability Act Compliance
No. of children in the care of the Clinical Nurse Co-ordinators for Children with Life Limiting Conditions (children’s outreach nurse)
Appendix 3
Activity
Community Healthcare
Transitional Care
Expected Activity 2019
Reported Actual 2019
% Variance from Target 2019
Day case (includes dialysis)
Total inpatient and day cases
Inpatient discharges >75 years
Day case discharges >75 years
Return ED attendances
Injury unit attendances
Other emergency presentations
Total no. of AS3 calls (inter-hospital transfers)
No. of intermediate care vehicle (ICV) transfer calls
No. of clinical status 1 ECHO calls activated
No. of clinical status 1 ECHO calls arrived at scene (excludes those stood down en route)
No. of clinical status 1 DELTA calls activated
No. of clinical status 1 DELTA calls arrived at scene (excludes those stood down en route)
Aeromedical Service – Hours (Department of Defence)
Irish Coast Guard – Calls (Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport)
Appendix 3
Reported Actual 2018
Births
Actual 2018
Expected Activity 2019
Reported Actual 2019
No. of persons covered by medical cards as at 31 December
No. of persons covered by GP visit cards as at 31 December
Total no. of items prescribed
No. of prescriptions
No. of claims
Appendix 3
Activity
Primary Care Reimbursement Service
Medical Cards
General Medical Services Scheme
Long-Term Illness Scheme
Drug Payment Scheme
Other Schemes
No. of high tech drugs scheme claims No. of dental treatment services scheme treatments No. of community ophthalmic services scheme treatments
100 bed CNU to replace beds in St. Patrick’s and St. Otteran’s (to include 20 psychiatry of later life beds and 80 long stay elderly beds)
Development of a new block to include palliative care unit, co-funded by Waterford Hospice * Details of capital costs are included within University Hospital Waterford in the South/South West Hospital Group
St. Patrick’s Hospital, John’s Hill, Waterford City
Palliative Care Unit (University Hospital Waterford)
Upgrade and refurbishment to achieve HIQA compliance
Listowel Community Hospital, Co. Kerry Caherciveen Community Hospital, Co. Kerry
Cork Kerry Community Healthcare
Upgrade and refurbishment to achieve HIQA compliance
Dungloe Community Hospital, Co. Donegal
Older Persons’ Services Daughters of Charity, Rosalie, Portmarnock,
Dublin 13 Dublin North City and County Community Healthcare Facility Community Healthcare
Provision of accommodation for the Cochlear Implant programme – refurbishment of existing St. Martins ward after decant to renal dialysis
Beaumont Hospital, Dublin 9
New Radiology Unit.
Includes additional ultrasound and CT room plus a multipurpose interventional suite.
Includes upgrade/refurbishment of underground duct.
Part funded by Friends of LGH
Replacement of fluoroscopy room with a full Interventional Suite
Provision of a Diabetic Unit to facilitate the commencement of a paediatric insulin pump service
Provision of a new IT Room for the hospital
Letterkenny University Hospital, Co. Donegal
Sligo University Hospital
University Hospital Galway
Saolta University Health Care Group
Phase 3: Fit-out and equipping of theatres
New hospital street extension
Lourdes Hospital, Drogheda, Co. Louth
RCSI Hospital Group
Midland Regional Hospital, Portlaoise, Laois
Replacement of two cardiac cath labs and enabling works for a third cath lab
Blood Science Project – extension and refurbishment of existing pathology laboratory to facilitate management services tender
40 bed modular unit
Development of a new block to include replacement inpatient beds ** This is a joint capital project between acute services and palliative care – see under Older Persons’ Services for further details
Replacement of fire alarm and emergency lighting systems
Cork University Hospital
South Tipperary General Hospital
University Hospital Waterford
Ward Block extension and refurbishment programme, incl. 16 single rooms and 4 double rooms – part funded by the Friends of Nenagh Hospital
AMAU and OPD reconfiguration
Nenagh Hospital, Tipperary
Ennis General Hospital, Co. Clare
University Hospital Limerick
UL Hospitals Group
New Radiation Oncology Unit
Cork University Hospital
South/South West Hospital Group
Appendix 5: Annual Energy Efficiency Report Appendix 5
In response to legislation SI 426 of 2014 (previously SI 542 of 2009), which requires public sector organisations to report annually, this appendix outlines the HSE’s position on its energy use and actions taken to reduce consumption.
As one of the largest public sector energy users the health service must act as an exemplar of best practice in taking climate action, reducing emissions and the mitigation of the adverse health effects of climate change.
Key measures set out in the Climate Action Plan for the public sector include targets of 50% energy efficiency and 30% greenhouse gas emissions reduction by 2030.
In addition, all public sector buildings, including healthcare buildings, must be upgraded to a B2 energy rating which will require an unprecedented major refurbishment programme.
A number of programmes of work have been established as part of the Estates Energy Reduction Implementation Plan.
Overview of Energy Usage in 2019
The National Health Sustainability Office is fully compliant with the requirements of SI 426 and has verified all HSE meter points for 2019.
This data is currently being validated by the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) and it is anticipated that this verified energy consumption data will be available from the SEAI in mid-2020.
The overview below is the verified energy usage in 2018 (excluding section 38 and section 39 agencies).
The verified 2019 energy usage, when issued by SEAI, will be made available at hse.ie/sustainability.
HBS Estates Offices improved energy management practices and performance through the formation of Estates Energy Bureaux, which were established in partnership with the SEAI.
This was developed as a scalable pilot initiative in the East Region and roll-out to the West and South Areas progressed in 2019.
This included the implementation of energy awareness programmes and development of registers of opportunities for energy efficiency projects in order to progress grant funding for projects.
Initial Energy Efficiency Projects which were identified on registers of opportunities were progressed.
The requirement for an Energy Efficient Design Review is now included in the Scope of Services for design teams for new projects and major refurbishments.
This ensures the design of new healthcare buildings maximise energy efficiency and are in compliance with energy standards. •
Operating and Financial Overview 2019
Financial Governance
Introduction 2019 was a year of continued challenges for the HSE driven by the complexities of on-going demand for services in our acute, community and social care services.
It was also a year that saw the welcomed re-establishment, on the 28 June 2019, of an external Board arising from the introduction of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019.
Four committees have been established to help the Board in the performance of its functions.
These committees are: •
Audit and Risk Committee
People and Culture Committee
Performance and Delivery Committee
Safety and Quality Committee
The HSE is currently in the process of developing a new corporate plan, fully informed by Sláintecare, which will focus on providing a clear medium-term roadmap for staff, patients, service users and all stakeholders.
Strategic Context
The HSE is required to use the resources available to it to deliver the type and volume of services provided for in the national service plan while prioritising improving the health of the population through promoting wellness and the provision of safe health and social care services for the citizens of Ireland.
The environment in which the HSE operates is increasingly complex.
There were over 4.9 million (m) people living in Ireland during 2019 representing a 3.8% increase since Census 2016 and 8.1% since 2010.
According to the Economic Social Research Institute (ESRI), the population in Ireland will have increased by circa another 1.1m people by the end of 2030 therefore adding to the number of people requiring HSE services.
People in Ireland are also living longer and life expectancy in Ireland has increased by almost two and a half years since 2007.
The increase in life expectancy in Ireland was consistently higher than the EU average over the past decade.
These predicted changes in our population will have implications for how we fund and deliver increasingly complex care and services.
While the population is growing across age groups, the most significant increases are evident in the age group cohort of 65 years or over.
The ESRI has predicted that by 2030 the share of the population aged 65 and over will have increased from 1 in 8 to 1 in 6 while the number of people aged over 85 is expected to double.
Lifestyle factors also contribute to the complexity of health provision in Ireland.
This includes the impact of smoking, drug use, alcohol consumption and obesity.
While the number of adults smoking in Ireland has decreased from 27% in 2002 to 14% in 2019, almost one third of Irish adults reported regular heavy alcohol intake and the obesity rates in Ireland has increased from 15% in 2007 to 18% by 2015.
The HSE is fully supportive of the need to make significant changes to the current models of health and social care and is committed to working with Sláintecare Programme and the Department of Health to deliver this change.
This will involve a greater cross government and society focus on helping people to stay healthy, new and more integrated models of health and social care, including better integration with the voluntary sector, and greater involvement of citizens, patients and service users in the design and delivery of care.
Sláintecare sets out the vision to deliver a transformation in the way care is organised, delivered and experienced in Ireland over the next 8 to 10 years, which aims to achieve more positive experiences and better outcomes for patients, service users and local communities.
Significant efforts have been made during 2019 to improve the overall financial planning and financial management of the HSE which resulted in the delivery of a small surplus on our non-capital expenditure of €60.5m or 0.35% of total funding.
Income Analysis
The HSE received revenue funding from the DoH of €16.471bn for the provision of health and social care services.
This included the allocation of once off net additional funding of €426m provided by way of a supplementary estimate for 2019.
Of the supplementary estimate received €50m was available for acute services, €50m for disabilities, €157m for Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS), €26m for Winter Plan, €51m for pay agreements, €9m for Brexit and €83m for areas such as State Claims Agency costs and which also covers demand led areas such as pensions and overseas treatment.
Overall this represented an increase of circa €1.249 billion or an 8.2% increase over 2018.
Table 5: Analyses Overall HSE Income for 2019 and 2018
Department of Health Grant
Private Patient Income
Superannuation Income from staff
Other Income
“First Charge”
Total Income per AFS
Financial Governance
Income Stream
Table 6: HSE Income Graph 2005 to 2019 While Table 6 shows that there has been an increase in HSE income and funding particularly in the years since 2016, this has to be looked at in the context of the percentage changes in public health expenditure by capita which has been reflected in Table 7.
DOH Grant €bn
Total Income €bn
Linear (DOH Grant €bn)
Table 7: Percentage Changes in Public Health Expenditure Per Capita, 2010 to 2018 Irish public health expenditure (capital and revenue) has been on the increase from a low of €13.4bn in 2013 to €17.9bn in 2019.
However, the rate of increase for each person in Ireland is far slower than the average Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) increase.
In fact, between 2010 and 2018, the per person increase in public health expenditure was 17% in Ireland versus an average 25% across the 36 OECD countries. 30% 25%
OECD average
Table 8: HSE Expenditure per Service Area 2019 and 2018 Financial Governance
Acute Hospitals
Primary Care
Social Care
Corporate Support Services
Mental Health
Health and Wellbeing
Other Demand Led
Total Expenditure
Expenditure and Outcome Analysis At the end of 2019 the HSE delivered a modest surplus of income over expenditure of €60.5m or 0.35% of its overall income.
This surplus arose primarily as a result of one off funding measures and savings that are not expected to be replicated in 2020.
The year remained challenging in operational services particularly in the area of acute hospital operations which reported a deficit in 2019 arising from greater than anticipated expenditure directly related to operational activity and demand for services.
In general, the impact of additional supplementary funding and savings measures enabled other key service areas to report surpluses for 2019 which are not necessarily achievable in 2020.
The overall expenditure reported for 2019 is €17.238bn which is 7% higher than the expenditure in 2018.
The table above analyses this expenditure by HSE service area.
Primary care and social care together account for circa 44% of the expenditure whilst the provision of acute hospital and National Ambulance Services accounts for almost 40% of that spend.
The overall increased expenditure in 2019 of 7% or €1.1bn is mainly in respect of additional pay measures, payment of consultant settlements and increased expenditure in respect of demand led areas such as pensions and state claims agency.
A more detailed analysis per service area is provided later in this report.
Acute Hospitals Services Acute services are provided for adults and children within six Hospital Groups, Children’s Health Ireland and the National Ambulance Service (NAS).
These services include scheduled care (planned care), unscheduled care (unplanned/ emergency care), diagnostics, cancer treatment, maternity and children’s services, as well as the pre-hospital emergency and intermediate care provided by NAS.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Acute hospitals continually work to improve access to healthcare, whilst striving to ensure that quality and patient safety issues, including the management of infection, are prioritised within allocated budgets.
The six Hospital Groups provide the structure to deliver an integrated hospital network of acute care to the adult population in each geographic area.
Children’s Health Ireland provides paediatric services in the greater Dublin area and incorporates the National Paediatric Hospital Development Board which is responsible for overseeing the building of the new children’s hospital.
Overall the acute hospitals services reported a deficit for 2019.
Operational service pressures drove increased clinical non pay cost, particularly drugs and laboratory.
Other non-pay cost pressures include cleaning and maintenance required in respect of increased infection control and compliance requirements.
From an income perspective, the continued reduction in receipts from hospital private maintenance changes continues to be a challenge.
The volume of inpatient activity was marginally below the target set out in the NSP 2019 (0.1%), although overall complexity was slightly higher than planned (0.2%).
Day case activity exceeded the targets set out in the NSP 2019, in terms of both activity volume and overall complexity (3.5% and 4.3% respectively).
Outpatient activity was also ahead of NSP 2019 target (0.4%).
The higher than expected operational costs experienced is significantly driven by this level of service delivery.
Social Care – Comprising Disability and Older Persons Services
The challenge in 2019 for the social care services was to continue to meet the rising demand for services as a result of an aging population with a longer life expectancy.
Primary Care Services
Managing the year on year growth in demand for communitybased social services has been one of the key challenges for older persons’ services in 2019.
The largest increase in Ireland’s population is in the age range of 65 and over, presenting a particular challenge for serving a growing, ageing and increasingly diverse population with more complex service needs.
Older persons services provide a wide range of services including home supports, community supports, intermediate care (both residential and in the home), as well as short stay and long stay care when remaining at home is no longer feasible (Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS)).
Overall the surplus reported in the older persons services has arisen from one time savings and a brought forward first surplus from 2018.
Disability Services
Disability services are provided to those with physical, sensory, intellectual disability and autism in day, respite and residential settings.
Services include personal assistant, home support, multi-disciplinary and other community supports.
The costs of providing residential care to people with an intellectual disability, including the provision of emergency placements, where individual placements can cost up to €0.5m, continued to be a significant financial pressure for this service area in 2019.
The cost is primarily driven by the clients need and the complexity of each individual case presenting.
Another significant increased spend in 2019 related to the cost associated with home support hours compared to other years in order to mitigate high cost residential placements.
Overall this service area reported a deficit in the year under review.
Mental Health Services
Specialist mental health services are provided in local community areas.
These services include acute inpatient services, day hospitals, outpatient clinics, community-based mental health teams (CAMHS, general adult and psychiatry of later life services), mental health of intellectual disability, community residential and continuing care residential services.
Sub-specialties include rehabilitation and recovery, eating disorders, liaison psychiatry and perinatal mental health.
A National Forensic Mental Health Service is also provided, including inpatient and in-reach prison services with a new modern and fit for purpose facility, increasing capacity to 130 beds, opening in 2020.
Primary care centres will support the strategic shift of care and services to primary care, ensuring better access to care, offering individuals and families a one stop shop to a broad range of primary care services in the community.
Of the 341 prioritised locations identified in 2012, 129 are operational at the end of 2019 with 74 in the process of development.
Whilst the opening of these primary cares centres over recent years have placed additional pressure on the primary care operational cost base, these facilities form a key part of the infrastructure required to provide primary care services to an aging demographic and underpin the overall shift to primary care.
Health and Wellbeing Services
Health and wellbeing services, including the National Screening Service and environmental health service, support our whole population to stay healthy and well by focusing on prevention, protection, health promotion and improvement, reducing health inequalities, and protecting people from threats to their health and wellbeing.
The services within health and wellbeing support people and communities to protect and improve their health and wellbeing; turning research, evidence and knowledge into action; acting as the authority on health, wellbeing and policy development; building an intelligent health system and a healthier population.
The overall surplus reported in this division in 2019 has arisen mainly from a brought forward first surplus from 2018.
Primary Care Reimbursement Scheme The PCRS supports the delivery of a wide range of primary care services to the general public through primary care contractors like general practitioners (GPs), dentists, opticians or pharmacists for the free or reduced cost services they provide to the public across a range of community health schemes or arrangements.
The schemes are operated by PCRS on the basis of legislation and/or government policy.
Mental health services reported a minor deficit in 2019 arising from a high level of reliance on agency and overtime due to a difficulty in recruiting staff as well as an increasing level of high cost residential placements with external private providers.
The level of expenditure on external high costs residential placements is growing year on year due to the increasing complexity of patient’s needs, along with our own capacity and staffing constraints.
The Finance Reform Programme continues to support the progression of the one of the key non-clinical strategic priorities of the HSE, namely to implement a single modern integrated financial management and procurement system (IFMS) across the Irish health service.
This system, along with the standard national processes it will support, aims to change how Finance operates in the health service.
It will enable our finance teams to better support our services in operating within their available resources while also enhancing their ability to deliver and demonstrate value for patients.
During 2019, work continued on the process designs, chart of accounts and enterprise structure in respect of the IFMS project.
The HSE concluded the successful procurement of an external systems implementation support partner in 2019.
Preparation for the national design and build stage commenced in December 2019.
Activity Based Funding
The HSE continued to progress the embedding of activity based funding (ABF) in 2019.
This form of funding is in place to varying extents in a number of HSE service areas including Primary Care Reimbursement Service, NHSS and acute hospitals.
Additionally, as part of the Sláintecare plan, the HSE has prepared a 3 year ABF development plan which has been submitted to the DoH for its consideration and approval prior to publication.
The HSE has clearly flagged that it will not be possible to deliver on many of the savings measures set out in NSP 2020 due to the need to apply resources to the COVID-19 response as it continues to develop along with the requirement to maintain all existing capacity and open additional capacity as part of that response.
The HSE’s Department of Public Health Officials who play a very significant role in supporting the HSE in the management of the on-going COVID-19 pandemic report to the Chief Clinical Officer (CCO) and their costs are reported in corporate support services.
The HSE acknowledges that the on-going COVID-19 measures have placed significant additional pressure on many of our staff, particularly our front line and clinical staff who are giving their all and who have our utmost respect and appreciation.
During 2019, there were two distinct governance arrangements in place within the HSE.
During the period 01 January to 27 June the Health Service Executive (HSE) Directorate was the governing body of the HSE under the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013, with the Director General accountable to the Minister for Health.
Since 28 June the Board is the governing body of the HSE and is accountable to the Minister for Health for the performance of its functions.
The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is in turn accountable to the Board and is responsible for managing and controlling generally the administration and business of the HSE.
The HSE exercises a wide range of statutory functions which may have significant implications both for individuals and for the public generally.
Under the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019, the Minister for Health can issue directions to the HSE on the implementation of Ministerial and government policies and objectives and determine priorities to which the HSE must have regard in preparing its Service Plan.
The HSE must comply with directions issued by the Minister for Health.
In line with the implementation of the recommendations of Sláintecare with regard to governance, the establishment of an independent Board was an important step in modernising and strengthening governance arrangements and sustaining reform.
The Board is responsible for holding the CEO and senior management to account for the effective performance of their responsibilities.
It is the responsibility of the CEO and his senior management team to ensure that the Board is provided with all the necessary information to enable it to perform its functions.
The CEO must also provide assurance to the Board that the functions which it has delegated to him are being appropriately discharged.
(i) to achieve the HSE’s objectives
(ii) for the internal performance and accountability in respect of the HSE’s:
Developing a plan for building public trust and confidence in the HSE and the wider health service.
Ensuring the HSE’s full support for and implementation of the Government’s programme of health reform as set out in the Sláintecare Implementation Strategy.
For 2019, exercising effective budgetary management, including improving the value achieved with existing resources and securing target saving, with the objective of delivering the National Service Plan within Budget.
It is required to satisfy itself that appropriate systems, procedures and practices are in place
a. performance of its functions
b. achieving its objectives in accordance with the corporate plan (iii) to enable compliance with the policies (whether set out in codes, guidelines or other documents, or any combination thereof) of the Government or a Minister of the Government to the extent that those policies may affect or relate to the functions of the Executive.
2.1 Decision Making, Oversight and Control
Approval of annual service plans and budgets
The Board has established the following mechanisms to ensure that it exercises appropriate decision-making, oversight and control of the HSE’s functions.
Setting performance objectives
Monitoring implementation, and evaluating the HSE’s performance
2.1.1 Delegation Policy Framework and Governance Arrangements
Overseeing major capital expenditure and investment decisions, and
Approval of the HSE’s annual accounts and annual reports.
The HSE’s Delegation Policy Framework and Governance Arrangements list the functions that have been delegated by the Board to the CEO, and by the CEO in turn to his Executive Management Team.
Provision is also made in law for employees to whom functions have been delegated or sub-delegated to further sub-delegate those functions.
2.1.3 Schedule of Attendance, Fees and Expenses In accordance with Part 3A of the Health Act 2004 (as inserted by Section 16K of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013), the Directorate were required to hold no fewer than one meeting in each of 11 months of the year.
For the period 01 January – 27 June 2019, the HSE Directorate met on 10 occasions.
See Table 10A.
2.1.2 Reserved Functions
The Board has a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved to it for decision (reserved functions) to ensure that the direction and control of the HSE is firmly in its hands (some of the matters may require Ministerial approval).
The reserved functions of the Board are listed in the Delegation Order issued to the CEO and include: •
The adoption of the HSE’s Corporate Plan with appropriate objective, indicators and targets against which performance can be measured
Reviewing and guiding strategic direction and major plans of action •
Risk management policies and procedures In accordance with Schedule 2, paragraph 2A of the Health Act 2004, (as amended by Section 32(b) of the Health Service Executive (Governance Act 2019), the Board are required to hold no fewer than one meeting in each of 11 months of that year.
Since its establishment on the 28 June 2019, the HSE Board have met on nine occasions holding six monthly Board meetings and three additional meetings.
The attendance at Board meetings is recorded in Table 10A.
The Board meetings deal with the reserved functions and other key areas.
Table 9: Directorate – Attendance at meetings 01 January – 27 June 2019 29/01/2019
Directorate
Number of meetings attended
n/a
Paul Reid (Appointed 14/05/2019)
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Directorate
Expenses
Table 10A: Board Members – Attendance at Board meetings 28 June – 31 December 2019 28/06/2019
Ciarán Devane (Chairperson)
Deirdre Madden* (Deputy Chairperson)
n/a
Remuneration
Financial Governance
Board Member
Number of meetings attended
* Deirdre Madden does not receive a fee in respect of her membership of the HSE Board under the one person one salary rule.
However an equivalent value is made to University College Cork in relation to backfilling her post.
Table 10B: Board Members Travel and Subsistence Board Member
Ciarán Devane (Chairperson)
Deirdre Madden (Deputy Chairperson)
n/a
Subsistence 2.1.4 Executive Management The Board is responsible for holding the CEO and Senior Management to account for the effective performance of their responsibilities.
It is the responsibility of the CEO and his Senior Management Team to ensure that the Board is provided with all the necessary information to enable it to perform its functions.
The CEO must also provide assurance to the Board that the functions which it has delegated to him are being appropriately discharged.
n/a €1,647.20 n/a €2,268.00 €278.12 n/a
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Committees
Financial Governance
The Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019 provides for the establishment of an Audit Committee and any other Committees that the Board deem as necessary for the purpose of providing assistance and advice in relation to the performance of the Board’s functions.
The previous Audit Committee and Risk Committees of the HSE which had been established in 2014 in accordance with the provisions of the 2013 Act were stood down and an Audit and Risk Committee, was established on 26 July 2019 in accordance with the provisions of the 2019 Act.
Audit and Risk Committee •
Cyber security
Organisational reputation
ICT systems and Infrastructure •
System of internal controls including management and prioritisation of resource allocation
Children’s Hospital
HSE Funded agencies
Safety, health and wellbeing of staff
Performance and Delivery
Disability services
Safety and Quality Committee.
Individual Performance management and accountability
Current configuration of hospitals
Healthcare Associated Infection and Antimicrobial Resistance
Screening services
Regulatory non-compliance
In order to prepare the agenda for forthcoming meetings and to follow up on outstanding actions, Committee members meet for a period in the absence of members of HSE management.
The Committee takes comfort and assurance from and works in concert with the work of other Board Committees, each of which has a specific remit as documented in their own terms of reference.
Liaison between the four Committees of the Board is provided through regular engagement between the Committee Chairpersons, sharing of minutes and with a joint meeting of the Audit and Risk and Safety and Quality Committees taking place early in 2020 to consider issues of mutual significance.
External members of Committees are entitled to fees, and these are sanctioned by the DoH and DPER.
Fees are paid to the majority of external members apart from those who are already public servants.
There is a set rate for each meeting they attend up to a maximum amount each year and this is processed through payroll.
All other members – Rate per attendance at meeting is €285 to a maximum of €1,710 per annum.
Providing oversight and advice in relation to the HSE Internal Audit function
Providing oversight and advice with regard to the operation of the HSE Risk Management framework and related activities within the function of risk management
Providing oversight and advice relating to anti-fraud policies, oversight of the operation of protected disclosure policies and processes, and arrangements for special investigations
Reviewing the arrangements for, and results of, internal and external audits and management’s response to the recommendations and points arising from same
Any other roles and responsibilities devolved to the Committee by the HSE Board.
Audit and Risk Committee
The Audit and Risk Committee is established and maintained in accordance with Section 40H of the Health Act 2004 as amended by Section 23 of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019.
The legislation also recognises that the Audit Committee has a role to provide oversight and advice on risk management.
Therefore, its title has been expanded to the ‘Audit and Risk Committee’ to reflect the full nature of its remit.
Legislation obliges membership of the Committee to comprise no fewer than three Board members and not fewer than four other persons who, in the opinion of the Board, have the relevant skills and experience to perform the functions of the committee, at least one of whom shall hold a professional qualification in accountancy or auditing.
Under current legislation the Committee is required to: •
Advise the Board and the CEO on financial matters relating to its function
Report in writing at least once in every year to the Board and CEO on those matters and on the activities of the Committee in the previous year and provide a copy of that report to the Minister.
The functions of the Audit and Risk Committee include a range of financial, statutory, compliance and governance matters as set out in legislation.
In support of its statutory remit, the Committee has established terms of reference approved by the Board.
These provide for the Committee’s role to extend to the following areas: •
Advising the Board and the CEO on financial matters and carrying out related reporting activities, including compliance reporting to the Board and the Minister for Health as required
Reviewing the appropriateness of HSE’s accounting policies, annual financial statements, annual report and required corporate governance assurances and any matters and advice relating to making a satisfactory recommendation of same to the Board
Financial Governance
• Risk Committee Chairperson – Rate per meeting €402.39 to a maximum of €2,414 per annum
The CEO is required to ensure that the Audit and Risk Committee is provided with all the Executive’s audit reports, audit plans and monthly reports on expenditure, and if he has reason to suspect that any material misappropriation of the Executive’s money, or any fraudulent conversion or misapplication of the Executive’s property, may have taken place, report that matter to the Audit and Risk Committee as soon as practicable.
In addition, the CEO provides to the Audit and Risk Committee information on any financial matter or procedure necessary for the performance of its functions by the committee when requested to do so by the Audit and Risk Committee and where such information relates to:
a. Any contract that the Executive proposes to enter into involving expenditure of an amount in excess of a threshold specified by the committee, and
b. Any legal proceedings taken or threatened against the Executive that may give rise to potential financial liability.
In order to provide for the maximum continuity between the two Committees, the Chairperson of the previous Committee remained in place until the end of December 2019.
In addition, another member of the previous Audit Committee was joined by two members of the old Risk Committee on the new Audit and Risk Committee as well as one additional external member.
The Audit and Risk Committee has agreed a detailed workplan to cover 2020 which seeks to address in a systematic and comprehensive manner the key roles and responsibilities of the committee.
In preparing its initial workplan for 2019 and subsequently for 2020, the Committee took account of the workplans of both the previous Audit Committee and the previous Risk Committee where relevant and incorporated elements into new workplans.
The CEO has assigned the following members of the HSE Senior Management Team to attend meetings of the Audit and Risk Committee.
The Chief Financial Officer, the National Director of Internal Audit and the National Director of Quality Assurance and Verification.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Table 11: Audit Committee Membership, Attendance and Remuneration 11/02/2019
Financial Governance
Audit Committee
Member 2019
Fee Paid for Period 01 January – 30 June 2019
Tom O’ Higgins (Chairperson)
n/a
Liam Woods (internal)
n/a
Anne O’ Connor (internal)
n/a
Table 12: Risk Committee Membership, Attendance and Remuneration 25/01/2019
Risk Committee
Member 2019
Fee Paid for Period 01 January – 30 June 2019
Sheila Ryan (Chairperson)
One Person One Salary rules
One Person One Salary rules
Received €570 for Risk Committee membership up until 08 April 2019
Colm Henry (internal)
n/a
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Table 13A: Audit and Risk Committee Membership, Attendance and Remuneration 27/08/2019
Fee Paid for Period 01 July – 31 December 2019
Tom O Higgins (Chairperson)
Brendan Lenihan (Vice Chairperson)
One Person One Salary rules
Financial Governance
Audit and Risk Committee Member 2019
Table 13B: Audit and Risk Committee Relevant Competency and Experience Audit and Risk
Tom O Higgins (Chairperson)
Chartered Accountant; Former PWC Partner; Former President of Chartered Accountants Ireland; Professional Independent Non Exec Director.
Brendan Lenihan (Vice Chairperson)
Chartered Accountant; Former President of Chartered Accountants Ireland; Professional Independent Non Exec Director; former financial executive and now consultant.
Chairperson, CIÉ Group; Former Director CEO National Library of Ireland; Professional Independent Non Exec Director.
Former CEO of Barnardos; Former political adviser; columnist; Member of the Charities Regulatory Authority.
Chief Information Officer AIB plc.
Chartered Accountant; Professional Independent Non Exec Director; former financial executive and now consultant.
Retired Assistant Chief of Staff Irish Defence Forces with responsibility for Risk Management.
Deputy Director – State Claims Agency, with special responsibility for risk and operations.
Chartered Accountant; former PWC Partner; Professional Independent Non Exec Director; Chairperson of Advisory Board of Northern Ireland Audit Office.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
People and Culture Committee
Financial Governance
Monitor the implementation of the HSE’s people mandate with a focus on improved governance with effective performance and accountability
Assure the Board that these arrangements are robust and effective and support the delivery of its objectives
Review risks relating to its people mandate and advise on management mechanisms and actions to improve these
Seek any information or explanations that it requires from any employee of the HSE or agency totally or partially funded by the HSE
Obtain independent legal or professional advice procured in accordance with the HSE’s procurement policy
Seek the attendance of persons with relevant experience and expertise at the People and Culture Committee meeting as necessary
A detailed workplan focused on these areas has been adopted by the People and Culture Committee covering key roles and responsibilities of the committee to ensure that all areas within its remit and terms of reference receive the appropriate focus.
The committee took account of the implementation plan developed for the People Strategy. The CEO has assigned the following members of the HSE Senior Management Team to attend meetings of the People and Culture Committee: Anne Marie Hoey, National Director of Human Resources, Dr Philip Crowley, National Director of Quality Improvement and Dr Paul Connors, National Director of Communications.
Table 14: People and Culture Committee Membership, Attendance and Remuneration 16/08/2019
People and Culture Committee 2019
Fee Paid for Period 01 July – 31 December 2019
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Progress in relation to delivery of the Board’s objectives
Development of strategic and annual service plans
Table 15: Performance and Delivery Membership, Attendance and Remuneration 27/08/2019
Performance and Delivery Committee 2019
Fee Paid for Period 01 July – 31 December 2019
One Person One Salary rules
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Financial Governance Safety and Quality Committee •
Given the profile and nature of services provided by the HSE, the Board decided on the establishment of a specific Committee to focus on the clinical aspects of the provision of health and personal social care.
Accordingly, it established a Safety and Quality Committee.
The scope of the Committee’s authority extends to all aspects of safety and quality within the public health service.
The role of the Committee is to provide strategic oversight of and advice on:
• the Patient and Service User Safety Framework
the Quality Improvement Framework of the HSE.
The Committee is not responsible for any executive functions and is not vested with any executive powers.
In relation to its duties and functions, it fulfils an advisory and support role only.
The Committee has established terms of reference approved by the Board.
Reviewing the effectiveness of the systems established by management to identify, assess, manage, monitor and report on risks, by receiving regular reports from the relevant National Director
• Reviewing and endorsing the National Service Plan and related annual work programmes of the relevant National Director service areas as they relate to safety and quality and advising the Board on the adequate resourcing and appropriate positioning of these functions within the HSE
Overseeing the implementation of good practice to ensure that lessons learnt from incidents, reviews, reports, complaints, claims and other channels are acted upon in a timely manner underpinned by effective communication
•Providing assurance that appropriate systems are in place to ensure compliance with all statutory obligations imposed on the HSE relating to patient and service user safety and quality matters
A detailed workplan has been adopted by the Safety and Quality Committee covering key roles and responsibilities of the committee to ensure that all areas within its remit and terms of reference receive the appropriate focus.
The committee took account of the workplan of the previous Risk Committee during its deliberations and incorporated all relevant elements into new workplan.
The CEO has assigned the following members of the HSE Senior Management Team to attend meetings of the Safety and Quality Committee: Dr Colm Henry, Chief Clinical Officer, Patrick Lynch, National Director of Quality Assurance and Verification and Dr Philip Crowley, National Director of Quality Improvement.
Table 16: Safety and Quality Membership, Attendance and Remuneration 22/08/2019
Fee Paid for Period 01 July – 31 December 2019
One Person One Salary rules
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Employee Short-Term Benefits
The Secretary of the HSE Board acts as Secretary to the Committees and additional administrative support is provided through the Office of the Board.
Employee short-term benefits in excess of €60,000 are set out in note 7 of the Annual Financial Statements.
Disclosures Required by the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (2016) The Board is responsible for ensuring that the HSE has complied with the requirements of the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (‘the Code’), as published by the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform in August 2016.
Consultancy Costs*
Consultancy costs include costs of external expert analysis and advice to management which contributes to decision making or policy direction.
It excludes outsourced ‘business as usual’ functions.
Financial Governance
Support to the Board and Committees
The following disclosures are required by the Code.
Table 17: Consultancy Costs 2019 €’000
Legal Advice
Tax and Financial advisory
Public Relations/Marketing
Human Resources and Pensions
Strategic Planning and Business Improvement
IT Consultancy
Other
Total Consultancy Costs
Consultancy costs charged to Income and Expenditure and Retained Revenue Reserves
Total Consultancy Costs
Consultancy Costs
Total consultancy costs further analysed as follows: Consultancy costs capitalised
* Included in Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure, Office and Administration Expenses, Legal and Professional Fees.
Legal Costs and Settlements*
Table 18 below provides a breakdown of amounts recognised as expenditure in 2019 in relation to legal costs, settlements and conciliation and arbitration proceedings relating to contracts with third parties.
This does not include expenditure incurred in relation to general legal advice received by the HSE which is disclosed in Consultancy costs shown above in Table 17.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Table 18: Legal Costs and Settlements Financial Governance
Total * Included in Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure, Office and Administration Expenses, Legal and Professional Fees.
There are no costs in relation to on-going matters involving other State bodies.
The number of cases covered by the above legal costs amounted to 1,964 in 2019 (2018: 1,671).
Additional legal costs and settlements were paid by the HSE’s Insurance Company.
The legal costs associated with claims processed by the State Claims Agency under the terms of the Clinical and General Indemnity Schemes are disclosed in Note 11 of the Annual Financial Statements.
Travel and Subsistence Expenditure* Table 19 below provides a breakdown of travel and subsistence as follows:
Table 19: Travel and Subsistence Expenditure 2019 €’000
Travel and Subsistence Expenditure Travel and subsistence expenditure is categorised as follows: Domestic
International
Total * Included in Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure, Office and Administration Expenses, Legal and Professional Fees.
Hospitality Expenditure*
Statement of Compliance
The aggregate total expenditure incurred in relation to hospitality was €Nil.
All entertainment type expenses disclosed in the financial statements relate to Client/Patient clinical programmes and are disclosed under Miscellaneous/Recreation.
The HSE has complied with the requirements of the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies, 2016 and has put in place procedures to ensure compliance with the Code Signed on behalf of the HSE Board
* Included in Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure, Office and Administration Expenses, Legal and Professional Fees.
Chairperson 13 May 2020
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Statement on Internal Control
1. Responsibility for the System of Internal Control
On behalf of the Health Service Executive (HSE) I acknowledge the Board’s responsibility for ensuring that an effective system of internal control is maintained and operated.
This statement has been prepared in accordance with the requirement set out in the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform’s (DPER’s) Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (2016).
The Health Act 2004 as amended by the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2019 made provision for the establishment of a board (the “Board”), which is the HSE’s governing body, with authority, in the name of the HSE, to perform its functions.
The Board is accountable to the Minister for Health for the performance of its functions.
The amended 2004 Act also provides for a Chief Executive Officer (CEO) who is accountable to the Board.
The Board must satisfy itself that appropriate systems of internal control are in place.
The Board is required to review the controls and procedures adopted by the HSE in order to provide itself with reasonable assurance that they are adequate to secure compliance by the HSE with its statutory and governance obligations.
The Board is also responsible for strengthening governance, oversight and performance.
The Board members have sufficient experience and expertise relating to matters connected with the functions of the HSE to enable them to make a substantial contribution to the effective and efficient performance of those functions.
The amended 2004 Act also provides for the establishment of an Audit and Risk Committee and such other committees or sub-committees that the Board deem necessary to assist it in the performance of its functions.
The Board has established four committees to provide more detailed oversight of specific areas as defined in the respective committee’s terms of reference.
These committees are:
2. Purpose of the System of Internal Control
The system of internal control is designed to manage and reduce risk rather than to eliminate risk and as such the review of the system of internal control is designed to provide reasonable but not absolute assurance of effectiveness.
The system of internal control seeks to ensure that assets are safeguarded, transactions are authorised and properly recorded and that material errors and irregularities are either prevented or detected in a timely manner.
3. Capacity to Handle Risk
The Board, as the governing body of the HSE, has overall responsibility for the system of internal control and risk management.
The Board may establish committees to provide assistance and advice in relation to the performance of its duties and functions.
The Audit and Risk Committee, was established on 26 July 2019 in accordance with the provisions of the 2019 Act.
This Audit and Risk Committee replaced the previous Audit Committee and Risk Committee which were previously established in 2014 in accordance with the provisions of the Health Service (Governance) Act 2013.
The membership of the Audit and Risk Committee consists of an independent external Chairperson, three other external members and four members of the Board.
All members have the relevant skills and experience to perform the functions of the Committee including highly experienced and qualified finance professionals. • the Audit and Risk Committee •
the Performance and Delivery Committee Among its responsibilities the Audit and Risk Committee is required: •
the People and Culture Committee. to advise the Board and the CEO on financial matters relating to their respective functions and a number of compliance matters related to same
to provide advice to the Board and the CEO on the regularity and propriety of transactions recorded in the accounts and on the effectiveness of the system of internal control operated by the HSE
to provide oversight and advice with regard to the operation of the HSE Risk Management framework and related activities
to provide oversight and advice in relation to the HSE Internal Audit Function.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Financial Governance
The Audit and Risk Committee operates under an agreed Charter which sets out in detail the role, duties and authority of the Committee.
The Audit and Risk Committee is required to meet at least four times annually.
In 2019 the Audit and Risk Committee met on six occasions since its appointment in June.
The previous Audit Committee met on four occasions and the previous Risk Committee met on three occasions with a joint meeting of the Audit and Risk Committees on one further occasion.
The HSE has an Internal Audit function with appropriately trained personnel operating in accordance with a written charter approved by the Audit and Risk Committee.
The National Director of Internal Audit reports to the Audit and Risk Committee and to the CEO and is a member of the HSE Executive Management Team (EMT).
The work programme of Internal Audit is agreed and monitored by the Audit and Risk Committee.
The HSE’s Internal Audit function is responsible for ensuring that a comprehensive programme of audit work is carried out continually throughout the HSE.
The purpose of this work is to provide assurance that controls and procedures are operated in accordance with best practise and with the appropriate regulations and to make recommendations for the improvement of such controls and procedures.
The scope of the Internal Audit function covers all systems and activities throughout the HSE including bodies funded by the HSE.
During 2019 Internal Audit completed a substantial body of work as part of its annual risk based work plan, issuing 164 audit reports, containing 1,159 recommendations, in relation to HSE and its funded agencies.
Particular focus was placed on auditing funded agencies as well as ICT audits.
The findings of these reports were considered by the HSE Audit and Risk Committee and EMT.
Based on the work of Internal Audit and the results of the individual internal audit engagements, the 2019 Annual Report of the National Director of Internal Audit provided an overall audit opinion that limited assurance can be provided in respect of governance, risk management and financial control processes.
The Internal Audit opinion is based on the following three possible ratings and their definitions:
Type of Overall Opinion Rating
1. Adequate
Definition
The system of governance, risk management and control has substantial weaknesses that need to be addressed urgently.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019 The HSE has developed an integrated risk management policy which clearly defines the roles and responsibilities for all levels of staff in relation to risk (financial and non-financial).
The policy is communicated across all levels of staff.
The HSE is committed to ensuring that risk management is seen as the concern of everyone, is embedded as part of normal day to day business and informs the strategic and operational planning and performance cycle.
Management at all levels of the HSE are responsible to the CEO for the implementation and maintenance of appropriate and effective internal control in respect of their respective functions and organisations.
This embedding of responsibility for the system of internal control is designed to ensure not only that the HSE is capable of detecting and responding to control issues should they arise, with appropriate escalation protocols, but also that a culture of accountability and responsibility pertains throughout the whole organisation.
Informed by the Scoping Inquiry into the CervicalCheck Screening Programme (Scally Report) the EMT commissioned a Risk Management Working Team to prepare proposals in relation to risk management in the HSE.
This working group was comprised of key senior HSE management representing all National service areas, Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs) and Hospital Groups.
It was sponsored by the National Director, Quality Assurance and Verification and was supported by external risk management experts.
This review was completed in 2019 and the review report and recommendations were accepted by the Board in September 2019.
The recommendations of the Review include the need for the HSE to: •
Adopt an Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) approach
Establish an ERM Programme
Appoint a dedicated Chief Risk Officer.
The Code of Governance reflects the current behavioural standards, policies and procedures to be applied within and by the HSE, and the agencies it funds, to provide services on its behalf
The Performance and Accountability Framework describes in detail the means by which managers in the health service, including those in CHOs and Hospital Groups will be held to account for performance in relation to service provision, quality and patient safety, finance and workforce
There is a framework of administrative procedures in place including segregation of duties, a system of delegation and accountability, a system for the authorisation of expenditure and regular management reporting
The HSE’s National Financial Regulations form an integral part of the system of internal control and have been designed to be consistent with statutory requirements and to also ensure compliance with public sector guidelines issued by DPER
The HSE has in place a devolved annual budgetary system and each year the Minister for Health formally approves the annual National Service Plan.
Defined accountability limits are set which are closely monitored by the National Performance Oversight Group (NPOG) on behalf of the CEO
The HSE has in place a wide range of written policies, procedures, protocols and guidelines in relation to operational and financial controls
The HSE carries out an annual comprehensive review of the system of internal control, details of which are covered in a later section of this report
There are systems and controls aimed at ensuring the security of the information and communication technology systems within the HSE.
This is an area of high priority for the HSE given the challenges of managing multiple systems across the entire HSE.
Implementation of the recommendations of this working group will be progressed in 2020.
The HSE has an established Healthcare Audit function which forms a key part of Quality Assurance and Verification.
The Healthcare Audit Team consists of appropriately trained personnel.
The purpose of this team is to provide assurance that controls and procedures related to the delivery of healthcare are operated in accordance with best practise and with the appropriate regulations and to make recommendations for the improvement of such controls and procedures.
Risk registers are in place at key levels in the organisation.
Risks on these registers have been assessed and evaluated according to their significance.
At an organisational level the Corporate Risk Register is subject to monitoring and updating on a quarterly basis.
The risk registers set out the existing controls, the risk rating and any additional controls required to mitigate each risk, and assigns both persons and timescales for completion of these.
An aspect of the quarterly monitoring process is to monitor the completion of additional controls required and to re-evaluate the risk based on this.
At the end of 2019 the EMT undertook a major revision of the Corporate Risk Register.
This was approved in February 2020.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Financial Governance
Additionally an annual Controls Assurance Statement (CAS) must be completed by all senior management at Grade VIII and above.
This statement requires management to confirm that they are aware of and comply with the key controls and the code of governance in place within the HSE.
5. Procurement
The HSE has procedures and policies in place to ensure compliance with current procurement rules and guidelines.
In procuring goods and services, all areas within the HSE must comply with the relevant procurement procedures which are set out in detail in the HSE’s National Financial Regulations.
Matters arising regarding controls over procurement are highlighted under heading 8 Internal Control Issues.
6. On-going Monitoring and Review
Formal procedures have been established for monitoring control processes and control deficiencies and are communicated to those responsible for taking corrective action and to the Board and senior management.
I confirm that the HSE conducted an annual review of the effectiveness of the Internal Controls for 2019 which took into consideration: •
Audit and Risk Committee minutes/reports
Findings, recommendations and Audit Opinions from internal audit reports
Annual Report of the National Director of Internal Audit
Findings arising from the Internal Control Questionnaire
Status of the recommendations of previous years’ reports on the Review of the Effectiveness of the System of Internal Control
Recommendations from management letters of the C&AG
The 2019 audit programme of the C&AG and in particular, the audit risks identified therein
Reports of the Committee of Public Accounts
Board and EMT minutes
Minutes of steering group/working group/implementation groups etc.
External reviews undertaken by the HSE to assist in identifying financial control issues and implementing revised policies and business processes
HSE Corporate Risk Register quarterly review process
Findings arising from the compliance monitoring arrangements with Section 38 and Section 39 agencies
Feedback from the HSE’s Healthcare Audit function.
The HSE has engaged an independent audit firm through a competitive process who have conducted a review of circa 6.5% of ICQ participants to validate the integrity of the responses.
The report on the review of the system of internal control will be considered by the Audit and Risk Committee, the CEO and EMT and by the Board of the HSE.
The results of the review indicate there is evidence that: •
The HSE has adopted a suite of internal policies and procedures, which form the basis of the internal control framework
Where high level risks have been identified, mitigating/ compensating controls are generally in place
Instances of non-compliance which may expose the HSE to material risk have been identified during this review process.
However, there is evidence that in general there is a programme of activity or plans in development to improve the controls environment
Awareness of the requirement for internal controls and accountability has increased during 2019 with a continued increase in the number of staff who completed the ICQ survey increasing significantly by a further 9%.
Analysis indicates that most managers have a very high understanding and awareness of their responsibility in respect to internal controls.
While this analysis indicates that most managers are reporting strong levels of compliance with internal controls there is still evidence of some continued lack of uniform consistency of responses in 2019 which indicates that further efforts are required in 2020 to improve understanding and compliance with internal controls.
Financial Governance
A significant enabler of the IFMS project is the development of a Financial Management Framework which defines the process, governance and controls required to demonstrate effective financial management practice across the health system. The Framework is a living document which has most recently been approved by the Finance Reform Programme (FRP) Steering Committee in June 2019.
Following a properly procured public tender process SAP was selected as the software platform for IFMS in June 2017.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
ii. Compliance with Procurement Rules Financial Governance
The HSE incurs expenditure of approximately €2.7bn annually in relation to goods and services subject to procurement regulations that are set out in detail in the HSE’s National Financial Regulations and underpinned by EU Directive 2014/24 and Public Procurement Guidelines for Goods and Services.
In line with the revised code of practice for the governance of state bodies, and the public procurement policy framework, the HSE is required to ensure that all contracts that are for a value of €25k or above, are secured competitively in line with public procurement requirements and to report the levels of non-compliance identified.
The findings of the review of the internal control system indicates that compliance with procurement regulations remains an issue for the HSE, in particular in relation to lack of compliance with: •
Requirements to procure and source from valid contracts already in place
Requirements for market testing, tendering and utilising competitive processes
Requirements to report non-compliance as per DPER code and circulars.
Supporting Infrastructure •
Assignment of responsibility for overseeing and managing related IT developments to an Assistant National Director in HBS Procurement.
Enhanced stock control through on going roll-out of the National Distribution Centre (NDC) and roll out of Point of Use System (POS) stock management system in the CHOs and Hospital Groups.
Continuing development of the Pricing and Assisted Sourcing System (PASS) which will continue to assist HSE staff by improving access and visibility of current contracts.
Finalisation of a three-year Compliance Improvement Plan 2017-2020 in Q4 2016, which addresses identified non-compliance issues.
Currently, a compliance improvement programme is being implemented in a systematic manner across selected CHOs and Hospital Groups working in conjunction with HBS Procurement.
Development of an online procurement compliance report which provides detail of non-compliance to Service areas.
This report is currently in use but is not yet fully populated for the entire HSE area.
Once fully developed this report will be used to both identify non-compliance and as a benchmark monitoring tool as part of the Compliance Improvement Plan roll-out.
Development of a digital Corporate Procurement Planning (CPP) toolset which will be available to each CHO and Hospital Group.
This online tool is expected to provide bespoke analysis and information such as procurement activity, expenditure which is greater than €25K, compliance levels and savings.
The HSE cannot provide a definitive rate of procurement non-compliance.
However the HSE expects to be in a position to provide this in respect of 2020.
The HSE procurement team tasked with providing this analysis is currently re-deployed to on-going COVID-19 priority workstreams.
Management and Internal Audit’s monitoring of non-compliance indicates that compliance with procurement regulations remains an issue for the HSE.
The HSE is continuing to progress a programme of reform of its procurement function to improve compliance with public procurement regulations and to increase the usage of contracts awarded by the HSE and the Office of Government Procurement (OGP).
In the context of the HSE’s current procurement systems and lack of IFMS it is acknowledged that it will take a number of years to fully address procurement compliance issues.
The HSE has continued to progress a number of initiatives in 2019, organised around three key themes: Sourcing
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
I confirm that the following on-going monitoring systems are in place: •
Key risks and related controls have been identified and there is a process in place to monitor the operation of these controls
Reporting arrangements have been established at all levels where responsibility for financial management has been assigned
There are regular reviews by senior management of periodic and annual performance and financial reports indicating HSE performance against budgets/forecasts
There are regular reviews by the Department of Health of the HSE’s performance in terms of budget and service plans as well as including other key non-financial reporting such as workforce planning • The CEO and EMT meet as part of normal business at least twice monthly •
The work of Internal Audit forms an important part of the monitoring of the internal control system within the HSE.
The annual work plan of Internal Audit is informed by analysis of the key risks to which the HSE is exposed and is approved by the Audit and Risk Committee.
The National Director of Internal Audit attends all Audit and Risk Committee meetings and has regular one to one meetings with the Chairperson of the Audit and Risk Committee as well as the CEO. Monitoring and review of the effectiveness of the HSE’s internal controls is also informed by the work of the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG).
7. Review of the Effectiveness of the System of Internal Control I confirm that the HSE has procedures to monitor the effectiveness of its risk management and control procedures.
Additionally the IFMS project will include state of the art procurement functionality.
Key procurement business processes have been mapped and these will be used to assist in the design of improved lean business processes.
This will result in improved compliance but will take a number of years to progress.
Governance of Grants to Outside Agencies In 2019, circa €4.7 billion of the HSE’s total expenditure related to grants to outside agencies.
The legal framework under which the HSE provides grant funding to agencies is set out in the Health Act 2004.
Annually the HSE funds in excess of 2,000 agencies, ranging from the large voluntary hospitals in receipt of over €300m to small community based agencies in receipt of €500. •
At the end of 2019, 91% (2018: 95%) of funding was covered by a completed SA/GA. Reports in this regard are circulated on a monthly basis to the service areas, CHOs and the Hospital Groups for their necessary attention.
Briefing sessions on the Governance Framework for both HSE and agency staff were held in all CHOs in November and December 2019.
These briefing sessions focused on the key fundamentals of the Governance Framework and in particular the requirement to have SAs and GAs completed by the end of February 2020.
Annual Compliance Statements are required from all S38 agencies (circa 74% of total funding) and S39 agencies in receipt of over €3 million (circa 14% of total funding). These agencies self-certify annually in respect of the governance procedures in place at Board and Executive level within their own organisation.
The ACS process informs the HSE of any gaps in compliance which then allows the HSE to ensure that required improvements are considered.
Annual Financial Monitoring Returns (AFMR) and Annual Financial Statements (AFS) are required to be received, recorded and reviewed by the CHO and HG staff.
The Service Provider Governance (SPG) online system was further developed to enable the recording of the AFMRs and AFS reviews.
Reports are produced from the SPG system and circulated to the CHOs and Hospital Groups.
This allows for the timely monitoring of the receipt and review of the AFS and AFMR.
The HSE is establishing Contract Management Support Units (CMSUs) in each of the nine CHOs.
The CMSUs will be a key resource within the CHOs in terms of enhancing the level of management and oversight in respect of S38 and S39 agencies funded by the CHOs.
Four pilot sites are currently being put in place in CHOs 4, 6, 7 and 9.
In addition CHOs 3, 5 and 8 are in the very early stages of design and development of their CMSUs.
Currently an implementation group is working with representatives from these CHOs to develop appropriate CMSU processes.
Among the key responsibilities for the CMSU will be to ensure that:
Before entering into any funding arrangement the HSE determines the maximum amount of funding that it proposes to make available along with the level of service to be provided for that funding.
For the larger agencies, cash is disbursed by the HSE’s Treasury unit based on agreed cash profiles.
The system of internal control operating in individual funded agencies is subject to review on a sample basis by Internal Audit.
The requirement to submit financial reports and staffing returns and to hold monitoring meetings is dependent on the size of the agency.
During 2019, there were weaknesses identified by the HSE’s annual internal control review, via the Controls Assurance Review process, and Internal Audit reports particularly in the application of processes relating to monitoring and oversight of some agencies.
The HSE has two types of contractual agreements with these agencies that are, in the main, tailored to reflect the level of funding in place.
Service Arrangement (SA), health agencies in receipt of funding in excess of €250,000
Grant Aid Agreement (GA), health agencies in receipt of funding of less than €250,000.
External and internal audits have found that: •
Monitoring meetings may not have been conducted at the frequency required in accordance with the HSE guidelines
There was a lack of evidence of the review of required financial performance data, such as management accounts and activity data
Contractual agreements relating to the provision of funding include a requirement for grantees to have appropriate risk management and governance arrangements in place and to comply with public procurement guidelines and public sector pay policy.
Audits and Annual Compliance Statement (ACS) submissions indicate some gaps in governance arrangements, compliance in some incidents with legacy issues regarding public sector pay policy and, in particular, procurement remains an issue.
The steps being taken by the HSE in recent years to address the weaknesses identified are set out below.
These initiatives have enabled the HSE, to a reasonable extent, to be satisfied that there are appropriate governance structures and procedures in place with these agencies.
AFS and AFMR of the relevant agencies are received and reviewed
Key documentation such as Business plans, Chairpersons’ statements, Management accounts, evidence of Monitoring Review Meetings along with other key activity data are received and reviewed as required.
Financial Governance
The HSE’s governance framework is consistent with the management and accountability arrangements for grants from Exchequer funding as set out in the instruction issued by DPER in September 2014, with one sanctioned exception in respect of prefunding arrangements.
The HSE’s Compliance Unit will continue to act in an advisory and support role during the implementation of this initiative.
In 2016, the HSE commenced an External Review of Governance at Board and Executive level in certain S38 agencies.
Currently 28 of these reviews have been completed and the remaining two are nearing completion.
Chairpersons of the Boards of each of these agencies have received either a final report or a draft report to consider.
The follow up process requires the HSE to
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Financial Governance
engage with the Chairpersons of the relevant Boards of the agencies to receive an update on progress plans with a further quarterly follow up process with the Agencies and the senior management staff in the CHOs and Hospital Groups.
A procurement process for a rolling review programme has commenced.
This rolling review programme is expected to include a number of S39 as well as the S38 agencies.
These reviews would expect to draw from and build upon the work being completed in the current external review process.
A five year cycle is envisaged with eight agencies being reviewed annually.
Some of the larger S38 and S39 agencies have themselves used the outputs of the Annual Compliance Statement, Annual Financial Monitoring Return and the external reviews, to implement their own initiatives to enhance their Governance at Board level.
Specifically this has had some positive impacts in key areas such as: –
Development of internal audit function
Rotation of Boards
Board Committee Structure
Development of Codes of Conduct.
In relation to the weaknesses identified in the area of procurement regarding S38 and S39 agencies, HBS continues to work with and provide on-going support to these agencies.
All agencies receiving annual funding in excess of €150k have been provided with online access to the HBS Pricing and Assisted Sourcing System (PASS).
This provides access for these agencies to the HBS/OGP contracts and Framework Agreements.
A Corporate Procurement Plan Guidance for Health Agencies has been communicated along with training by HBS Procurement.
On-going review of audit findings relating to the governance of grants to outside agencies is a priority for the HSE and there are established processes in place for following up on internal audit as well as external audit findings (local management and national management letters).
iv. Information Communication Technology (ICT)
The Office of the Chief Information Officer (OoCIO) delivers and manages a full range of ICT services throughout the HSE and in part of the voluntary acute sector.
The HSE have a base of over 50,000 users using approximately 1,817 applications and over 1,000 networked sites.
In addition, the OoCIO provide a range of national applications to the acute voluntary sector and indirectly supports their user base.
There are approximately 266 ICT projects currently being progressed, of which about 50 are large multi-annual programmes or projects.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
The OoCIO is committed to improving controls in respect of cyber security.
The OoCIO has a number of programmes underway to manage these weaknesses across our large domain.
These include Windows 7 refresh programme, the single sign-on programme, other key infrastructure upgrades, and the upgrading of application software which will, over time, provide a means for the following: •
Single logon to domains and applications which ensures that all staff have unique and safe access to the domains and applications
Single email platform to improve cross regional communication and collaboration
Upgraded infrastructure with modern security features
Upgraded applications and database technology.
Migration to a single digital identity for staff has commenced and will continue to be rolled out during 2020/2021 across CHOs, Hospital Groups and HBS, as well as central functions.
The OoCIO also has plans to improve resourcing to ensure that staff with the right blend of technology skills, are situated where needed most.
A formal review of ICT policies was launched in January 2020 by the CIO, as part of normal operations within OoCIO this will be complete during Q3 of 2020.
Following this review and the likely updating of some policies, OoCIO management intends to conduct a compliance exercise to assess and baseline the level of compliance with these policies.
This compliance assessment will inform what further actions then need to be taken.
OoCIO management has initiated an Infrastructure Migration Programme which will migrate selected disaster recovery environments to the cloud.
The initial stages of this programme will in turn inform a cloud services procurement to be commenced later this year.
That procurement will include provision for disaster recoveries for all systems.
Further, the Internal Audit function in collaboration with external specialist ICT audit support will continue to conduct targeted audits on a risk management basis.
v. Risk Management
As detailed in section 3 the HSE recognises the importance of a strong Risk Management Framework.
The recommendations of the Risk Management Review were approved by the Board in September 2019.
Implementation of these recommendations will be progressed during 2020.
The HSE acknowledges that the current and on-going COVID-19 pandemic poses a risk that the management actions identified in this section could be delayed due to the prioritisation of COVID-19 measures.
The HSE’s priority at this time is to safeguard the people of Ireland that it serves and to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
However, the HSE considers that the system of internal control is also a priority.
9. Conclusion
Financial Governance The report on the Review of Effectiveness of the System of Internal Control in the HSE has been considered by the HSE’s Audit and Risk Committee who have provided advice on same on behalf of the Board.
The HSE is an organisation undergoing significant change as well as facing a significant challenge in terms of its response to the current COVID-19 pandemic emergency facing the country.
The HSE’s control systems still rely on the legacy financial systems of the former health bodies it replaced.
These legacy systems will be replaced on a phased basis with a single national integrated financial and procurement system as detailed earlier in section 8.
The review of the system of internal control indicates that there are limitations and weaknesses observed in the HSE’s system of internal controls.
However where these weaknesses have been observed there is some evidence of mitigation and/or management action plans that have been undertaken to reduce the risk exposure, sufficient to support the adoption of the Annual Financial Statements.
However, these weaknesses taken in conjunction with the overall 2019 limited audit opinion issued by the National Director of Internal Audit mean that the review can only provide limited assurance in respect of the system of internal control.
The HSE acknowledges that there is a requirement to improve overall levels of compliance with the system of internal control, and this is receiving senior management attention, however, it is encouraging to note that the 2019 review indicates a continued growing awareness of the importance of improved accountability and responsibility at all levels of HSE staff, and stronger engagement with the controls assurance process for 2019.
The Board acknowledges that it has overall responsibility for the system of internal control within the HSE and will continue to monitor and support further development of controls.
Progress will be reassessed in the 2020 Review of the Effectiveness of the System of Internal Control.
Chairperson 13 May 2020
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Comptroller and Auditor General Report For presentation to the Houses of the Oireachtas Financial Governance
Health Service Executive
Opinion on the financial statements I have audited the financial statements of the Health Service Executive for the year ended 31 December 2019 as required under the provisions of Section 36 of the Health Act 2004.
The financial statements comprise •
the statement of revenue income and expenditure
the statement of capital income and expenditure
the statement of financial position
the statement of changes in reserves
the statement of cash flows and
the related notes, including a summary of significant accounting policies.
In my opinion, the financial statements •
have been properly prepared in accordance with the accounting standards specified by the Minister for Health as set out in the basis of preparation section of the accounting policies.
Report on information other than the financial statements, and on other matters The Health Service Executive has presented certain other information together with the financial statements.
This comprises the annual report including the governance statement and Board members’ report, and the statement on internal control.
My responsibilities to report in relation to such information, and on certain other matters upon which I report by exception, are described in the appendix to this report.
Procurement non-compliance
The statement on internal control discloses that compliance with procurement regulations remains an issue for the Health Service Executive, but that it is not yet in a position to quantify the value of its expenditure on goods and services where the procedures employed did not comply with procurement guidelines.
The statement on internal control sets out the steps being taken by the Health Service Executive to address its non-compliance with procurement rules, but it acknowledges that it will take a number of years to fully address procurement compliance issues.
Basis of the opinion
I conducted my audit of the financial statements in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing (ISAs) as promulgated by the International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions.
My responsibilities under those standards are described in the appendix to this report.
I am independent of the Health Service Executive and have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the standards.
I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Comptroller and Auditor General 14 May 2020
Appendix to the report
The members are responsible for •
the preparation of financial statements in the form prescribed under Section 36 of the Health Act 2004 and accounting standards specified by the Minister for Health
ensuring the regularity of transactions
assessing whether the use of the going concern basis of accounting is appropriate, and
such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Responsibilities of the Comptroller and Auditor General
I am required under Section 36 of the Health Act 2004 to audit the financial statements of the Health Service Executive and to report thereon to the Houses of the Oireachtas.
My objective in carrying out the audit is to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement due to fraud or error.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with the ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
As part of an audit in accordance with the ISAs, I exercise professional judgment and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit.
In doing so, •
I identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements whether due to fraud or error; design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks; and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.
The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
I obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the internal controls.
I evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures.
Financial Governance
Responsibilities of Board members
I conclude on the appropriateness of the use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, on whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Health Service Executive’s ability to continue as a going concern.
If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion.
My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my report.
However, future events or conditions may cause the Health Service Executive to cease to continue as a going concern.
My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information presented with those statements, and I do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with my audit of the financial statements, I am required under the ISAs to read the other information presented and, in doing so, consider whether thwe other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or with knowledge obtained during the audit, or if it otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If, based on the work I have performed, I conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, I am required to report that fact.
Reporting on other matters
My audit is conducted by reference to the special considerations which attach to State bodies in receipt of substantial funding from the State in relation to their management and operation.
I report if I identify material matters relating to the manner in which public business has been conducted.
I seek to obtain evidence about the regularity of financial transactions in the course of audit.
I report if I identify any material instance where public money has not been applied for the purposes intended or where transactions did not conform to the authorities governing them.
I also report by exception if, in my opinion, •
I have not received all the information and explanations I required for my audit, or
the accounting records were not sufficient to permit the financial statements to be readily and properly audited, or
the financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure For the year ended 31 December 2019 Financial Governance
Notes
Income
Department of Health Revenue Grant
Deficit on Revenue Income and Expenditure brought forward
Patient Income
Other Income
Expenditure
Pay and Pensions
Clinical
Non Clinical
Other Client/Patient Services
Non Pay
Clinical
Patient Transport and Ambulance Services
Primary Care and Medical Card Schemes
Other Client/Patient Services
Housekeeping
Office and Administration Expenses
Other Operating Expenses
Long Stay Charges Repaid to Patients
Hepatitis C Insurance Scheme
Payments to State Claims Agency
Nursing Home Support Scheme (Fair Deal) – Private Nursing Home only
Net Operating Surplus/(Deficit) for the Year All gains and losses with the exception of depreciation and amortisation have been dealt with through the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure and the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure.
The primary financial statements of the HSE comprise the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure, Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure, Statement of Changes in Reserves, Statement of Financial Position and Statement of Cash Flows.
Chairperson
Chief Executive Officer
Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure For the year ended 31 December 2019
Income
Department of Health Capital Grant
Surplus on Capital Income and Expenditure brought forward
Revenue Funding Applied to Capital Projects
Application of Proceeds of Disposals
Government Departments and Other Sources
Financial Governance
Notes
Expenditure
Net Capital Surplus for the Year
All gains and losses with the exception of depreciation and amortisation have been dealt with through the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure and the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure.
The primary financial statements of the HSE comprise the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure, Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure, Statement of Changes in Reserves, Statement of Financial Position and Statement of Cash Flows.
Statement of Changes in Reserves For the year ended 31 December 2019 Financial Governance
State Investment in PPP Service Concession Arrangements
Less: Net book value of Property, Plant and Equipment disposed in year
Balance at 31 December 2018
Balance at 1 January 2019
Transfer of Deficit/(Surplus) in accordance with Section 33(3) of the Health Act 2004, as amended
Net Surplus for the year
Proceeds of Disposal Account – reserves movement
State Investment in PPP Service Concession Arrangements
Less: Net book value of Property, Plant and Equipment disposed in year
Balance at 31 December 2019
The primary financial statements of the HSE comprise the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure, Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure, Statement of Changes in Reserves, Statement of Financial Position and Statement of Cash Flows.
Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade – Irish Aid: programme for overseas development
Friends of St. Luke’s Rathgar
Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional and Gaeltacht Affairs – Helicopter Services
Clinical Trials Ireland – Clinical Research Trials
EU Income – various projects
Genio Trust
Education and Training Boards/Solas
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Ireland
Department of Justice – Irish Refugee Programme
Enterprise Ireland
NEIC Development Grant
Department of Children and Youth Affairs – Young Peoples Facilities and Services
The Atlantic Philanthropies – Single Assessment Tool for the Elderly The Atlantic Philanthropies – National Dementia Strategy Department of Children & Youth Affairs/TUSLA – Galway Teen Parents Support Programme Katherine Howard Foundation – Nurture National Treatment Purchase Fund
Friends of Wexford General Hospital
Friends of Letterkenny University Hospital – Donation of X-Ray Imaging Machine
Financial Governance
* Only income from agencies in excess of €100,000 in either year are shown.
Income from Other Agencies that did not exceed €100,000 in either year is shown at Note 5(a) under Miscellaneous Income.
Accordingly, the 2018 comparatives above have been re-stated where appropriate.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Note 6 Pay and Pensions Expenditure Financial Governance
Health and Social Care Professional
Superannuation
Medical/Dental
Nursing
Health and Social Care Professional
Management/Administration
General Support Staff
Superannuation
Management/Administration
General Support Staff
Other Patient and Client Care
Superannuation
Clinical HSE Staff
Medical/Dental
Nursing
Clinical Agency Staff
Non Clinical HSE Staff
Non Clinical Agency Staff
Other Client/Patient Services HSE Staff
Other Client/Patient Services Agency Staff Other Patient and Client Care
Total Pay Expenditure
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Note 6 Summary Analysis of Pay Costs Non Clinical
Weekends
On-Call
Arrears*
Employer PRSI
Superannuation**
Basic Pay
Wages and Salaries
Total HSE Pay
* Note that the HSE has reversed a legacy provision of €68m relating to the ongoing consultants liability in its 2018 accounts, see ‘Arrears’.
This has resulted in a one off benefit in the year which will not be replicated, see Note 26.
Total Pay Costs above relate to HSE services only.
Pay costs for employees in the voluntary sector are accounted for under Non-Pay Expenditure (Revenue Grants to Outside Agencies).
See Note 8 and Appendix 1.
Superannuation
Eligible staff employed in the HSE are members of a variety of defined benefit superannuation schemes.
Superannuation entitlements (i.e. pensions) of retired staff are paid out of current income and are charged to income and expenditure in the year in which they become payable.
In accordance with a Directive from the Minister for Health, no provision is made in the financial statements in respect of future pension benefits and no charge is made to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure in respect of this.
Superannuation contributions from employees who are members of these schemes are credited to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure when received.
No formal actuarial valuations of the HSE’s pension liabilities are carried out.
The Pension charge to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure for 2019 was €747m (2018: €728m), which included payments in respect of once-off lump sums and gratuity payments on retirement of €112m (2018: €128m).
Ongoing superannuation payments to pensioners
Once-off lump sums and gratuity payments
**Analysis of Superannuation
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Termination Benefits
Financial Governance
Termination benefits charged to Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure
The termination benefits above relate to settlements with seven staff during 2019 (2018: five staff).
In addition to the payments outlined above, one staff member was granted added years on termination.
The value of enhanced pension arrangements was €nil.
Legal costs of €274,759 (2018: €28,380) were also incurred in relation to concluding the termination agreements.
Note 7 Employment
The number of employees at 31 December by Area of Operation was as follows (in whole time equivalents (WTEs)):** 2019
Mental Health
Primary Care
Ambulance Services
Corporate and HBS
Total HSE employees
Voluntary Sector – Non Acute Services
Sub-total Section 38 Sector employees***
Disability and Older Persons’ Services Health and Wellbeing
Total Health Sector Employees (including Home Helps)**** Source: Health Service Personnel Census.
* 2018 figures are restated to reflect current methodology and organisational mappings.
** All figures are calculated to 2 decimals and expressed as whole-time equivalents (WTE) under a methodology as set out by the Department of Health.
*** Health Sector staffing figures relate to direct employment levels as returned through the Health Service Personnel Census (HSPC) for the public health sector (HSE & Section 38 Voluntary Hospitals & Agencies).
**** Directly employed home help staff are included in reported WTE w.e.f. 2019 and historical figures have been restated to reflect this methodology change.
Pre-registration Student Nurses on clinical placement are recorded at 50 percent actual WTE in line with WRC agreement.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Additional Analysis – Department of Expenditure and Reform Circular 13/2014 requirement
Pay Band (Number of Staff)
Total HSE employees in excess of €60,001
Financial Governance
The number of HSE employees whose total employee benefits (including basic pay, allowances, overtime, night duty, weekends, on-call, arrears and excluding employer PRSI, employer pension costs) for the reporting period fell within each band of €10,000 from €60,000 upwards are as follows:
* The HSE does not have an integrated payroll system and this disclosure which is required by DPER circular 13/2014 has therefore been prepared from multiple payroll systems across HSE areas.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure
Financial Governance
Clinical
Net Cost Drugs and Medicines (excl. demand led schemes) Blood/Blood Products
Medical/Surgical Supplies
Other Medical Equipment
Laboratory
Professional Services (e.g. therapy costs, radiology etc.)
Patient Transport
Vehicles Running Costs
Dental Treatment Services Scheme
Community Ophthalmic Services Scheme
Cash Allowances (Blind Welfare, Mobility, etc.)
Elderly and Non-Fair Deal Nursing Home Payments
Rehabilitative and Vocational Training
Respite Beds
Professional Services e.g. care assistants, childcare contracted services, etc.
Education and Training
Medical Gases
X-Ray/Imaging
Education and Training
Patient Transport and Ambulance Services
Primary Care and Medical Card Schemes Pharmaceutical Services
Less Rebate from Pharmaceutical Manufacturers* Less Prescription Levy Charges
Net Cost Pharmaceutical Services Doctors’ Fees and Allowances
Pension Payments to Former District Medical Officers/Dependents
Capitation Payments:
Treatment Abroad Schemes and Related Expenditure Intellectual/Physical Disabilities, Psychiatry, Therapeutic Services etc.
Other Client/Patient Services
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Furniture, Crockery and Hardware
Bedding and Clothing
Grants to Outside Agencies
Housekeeping Catering
Financial Governance
Office and Administration Expenses Maintenance
Finance Costs
Prompt Payment Interest and Compensation Insurance
Legal and Professional Fees
Bad and Doubtful Debts
Education and Training
Travel and Subsistence
Audit
Vehicle Costs
Computers and Systems Maintenance
Other Operating Expenses
Burial Expenses
Recreation (Residential Units) Materials for Workshops
Refunds
* In respect of 2016 IPHA Agreement and special arrangements for specific drugs and medicines.
** This relates to CervicalCheck payments.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Note 9 The Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 Financial Governance
The Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 provides the legislative basis for the repayment of what has been referred to as ‘long stay charges’, which were incorrectly levied on persons with full medical card eligibility prior to 14 July 2005.
The scheme allows for the repayment of charges to the following people: •
Living people who were wrongly charged at any time since 1976
The estates of people who were wrongly charged and died on or after 9 December 1998
A special account was set up which is funded by monies provided by the Oireachtas and from which repayments are made.
An amount of €2m was set aside in 2019 for this purpose.
The majority of this funding refers to a provision for payments that will arise as a result of follow-on claims and offer acceptances.
The scheme closed to new applicants on 31 December 2007 and nearly 14,000 claims have been received in respect of living patients and nearly 27,000 claims in respect of estates.
Up to 31 December 2019, 20,300 claims were paid.
As at December 2019, there were no outstanding claims being processed to offer stage under the scheme.
€0.5m has been provided in the HSE’s 2020 budget to fund repayments for outstanding claims and associated administrative costs.
The cumulative total expenditure of the scheme (including administrative costs) to 31 December 2019 is €485.82m.
In 2019, the following expenditure has been charged to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure in respect of the Repayments Scheme: 2019 €’000
Repayments to Patients
Payments to Third Party Scheme Administrator
Office Expenses*
Total Non Pay
Pay
Non Pay
Legal and Professional Fees
Total * All expenditure in relation to the Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 is included in HSE expenditure.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Note 10 The Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act 2006
The overall cost over the lifetime of the scheme was originally estimated at €90m.
The cumulative expenditure on the insurance scheme to 31 December 2019 was €11m.
Financial Governance
The Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act 2006 established a statutory scheme to address insurance difficulties experienced by persons infected with Hepatitis C and HIV through the administration within the State of blood and blood products.
This scheme addresses the problems faced by these persons due to their inability to purchase mortgage protection and life assurance policies as a result of contaminated blood products being administered to them.
The scheme covers the insurance risk for the 1,700 or more people entitled to avail of assurance products, regardless of any other medical conditions these people may have, once they pay the standard premium that an uninfected person of the same age and gender would pay.
The life assurance element of the scheme was launched by the HSE in September 2007.
A further element, providing for travel insurance cover, was introduced in March 2009.
In 2019, the following expenditure has been charged to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure in respect of the Insurance Scheme: 2019 €’000
Payments of premium loadings
Payments of benefits underwritten by HSE
Total Non Pay
Total**
Pay
Non Pay
Office Expenses* * All expenditure in relation to the Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act 2006 is included in HSE expenditure.
** These costs are included in the Hepatitis C Insurance Scheme Special Account.
Other Hepatitis C Costs are included in the Hepatitis C Special Account and the Hepatitis C Reparation Account.
Note 11 State Claims Agency Since 1 July 2009, the HSE is funded for claims processed by the State Claims Agency under the terms of the Clinical Indemnity Scheme.
From 1 January 2010, the National Treasury Management Agency (Delegation of Functions) Order 2009 extended the State indemnity to personal injury and third party property damage claims against the HSE.
Awards paid to claimants under the terms of the scheme are accounted for on a pay-as-you-go basis.
The State Claims Agency’s best current estimate of the ultimate cost of resolving each claim, includes all foreseeable costs such as settlement amounts, plaintiff legal costs and defence costs such as fees payable to counsel, consultants etc.
In 2019, the charge to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure was €390.94m (2018: €318.69m).
Based on actuarial estimates, the charge to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure is expected to increase significantly in future years.
In accordance with the directions of the Minister for Health, no provision has been made for this liability in the financial statements.
The estimated liability is revised on a regular basis in light of any new information received for example past trends in settlement amounts and legal costs.
At 31 December 2019, the estimated liability incurred to that date under the Clinical Indemnity Scheme and State indemnity was €3,302m (2018 €2,792m).
Of this €3,302m, approximately €2,722m relates to active claims in respect of clinical care, with the balance of the estimated liability relating to non-clinical care claims.
Active claims are those that have been notified to the State Claims Agency through legal process and that have not yet concluded as at the reporting date.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Financial Governance
Note 12 Long-Term Residential Care (incorporating Nursing Homes Support Scheme/Fair Deal) The Nursing Homes Support Scheme (Fair Deal) commenced in 2009 and phases out the former Nursing Homes Subvention Scheme and the ‘contract beds’ system for older persons.
Under the scheme, people who need long-term residential care services have their income and assets assessed, and then contribute up to 80% of assessable income and up to 7.5% per annum of the value of the assets they own, subject to a maximum period of three years in respect of their principal private residence, towards the cost of their care.
The HSE pays the balance, if any, of the costs of their care in both registered public and private nursing homes covered under the scheme.
Costs of Long-Term Residential Care (Nursing Homes Support Scheme/Fair Deal) 2019 €’000
Section 39 Agencies
Private Nursing Homes Contract Beds and Subvention Payments
Total Payments to Private Nursing Homes including Section 39 Agencies
Gross NHSS Cost of Public Nursing Homes*
Payments to Section 38 Agencies
Nursing Home Fixed and Other Unit Costs
Private Nursing Homes
Total Long-Term Residential Care
* Public nursing homes costs are included under the relevant expenditure headings in the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure.
Patient contributions
NHSS recipient contributions for those patients in public homes amounted to €63.07m (2018: €61.14m) and are included in the HSE Financial Statements – Revenue Income & Expenditure Account.
NHSS recipient contributions for those patients in voluntary centres (S38 Organisations) amounted to €6.86m (2018: €6.67m), and is retained by those centres and does not constitute income for the HSE.
Additional Income
Under Section 27 of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act 2009, a Schedule of Assets must be submitted to the HSE in respect of a deceased person who received financial support under the Scheme.
This is checked to identify and calculate any overpayment of financial support that is repayable to the HSE pursuant to Section 42 of the Act.
The HSE collected income of €7.61m during 2019 (2018 : €6.58m) in respect of non-declared income and assets of Fair Deal clients.
Contract beds and Subvention beds In 2019, payments of €15.9m (2018: €20.1m) were made in relation to contract beds and nursing home subvention.
These schemes are being phased out having had no new entrants since the Nursing Homes Support Scheme commenced in 2009.
Expenditure within public facilities Within the public homes in 2019 there was an additional €26.57m (2018: €23.12m) of costs relating to long-term care.
These costs related to fixed unit costs and other costs incurred which were in excess of the reimbursed ‘money follows the patient’ rate paid under the Nursing Homes Support Scheme. Cost of Public Nursing Homes
In 2019, the cost of public nursing homes amounted to €359.73m (2018 €354.67m), these costs are gross and the client contribution element amounted to €63.07m (2018 €61.13m).
The contributions are recognised as income in Long Stay Charges in Statement of Income and Expenditure.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Ancillary State Support
The total gross amount of Ancillary State Support advised to Revenue as at 31 December 2019 for recoupment from the commencement of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme (where a relevant and non-relevant event has occurred) was €160.74m, representing 7,483 client loans.
As at 31 December 2019 the Revenue Commissioners are collecting €160.12m, representing 7,497 clients.
The difference accounts for clients where their Nursing Home loan is not due for repayment such as the Further Deferral option, as mentioned above, and also clients who wish to make a voluntary repayment prior to a relevant event occurring.
The Revenue Commissioners have confirmed that they had received €113.28m of loan repayments paid in full, representing 5,699 client loans.
Financial Governance
Ancillary State Support is an optional extra feature of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme for people who own property or assets in the State.
Instead of a person paying their assessed contribution for care from their own resources, a person can choose to apply for a Nursing Home Loan, to cover the portion of their contribution, which is based on property or land-based assets within the State.
The HSE then pays that portion of the cost of care on top of the State Support payment.
The loan is paid back to the State following the occurrence of a relevant event e.g. sale of the asset or death of the person.
Repayment of the loan is made to the Revenue Commissioners.
In certain cases, repayment of the loan can be deferred.
This part of the scheme is designed to protect people from having to sell their home during their lifetime.
The total amount of Nursing Home Loan payments made under the Nursing Homes Support Scheme that are outstanding (i.e. where a repayable amount has not been notified to Revenue for collection – a relevant event has not occurred), as at 31 December 2019 is €140.01m.
This amount does not include an adjustment for CPI as a relevant event has not yet occurred.
Ancillary State Support details at 31 December are as follows:
Number of loans
Number of loans
Advised by HSE to Revenue for recoupment
Confirmed by Revenue as being paid*
Not yet advised to Revenue for recoupment
Total Ancillary State Support outstanding
Additions to Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 15) Land and Buildings – Service Concession*
Additions to Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 15) Land and Buildings – Other
Additions to Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 15) Other than Land and Buildings
(a) Additions to Fixed Assets Funded from Department of Health Capital Grant Funded from Department of Health Revenue Grant Capitalised – Investment in PPP Service Concession Arrangements*
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
(b) Analysis of Expenditure Charged to Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure Financial Governance
Total expenditure on HSE Projects charged to capital***
Total Capital Expenditure per Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure
Expenditure on HSE’s own assets (Capitalised) Expenditure on HSE projects not resulting in property, plant and equipment additions** Capitalised Interest – PPP Service Concession Arrangements*
* Relates to Primary Care Centre assets acquired under Public Private Partnership (PPP) service concession arrangements.
Waterford Hospice Movement Ltd – Waterford Hospital Palliative Care Unit
Insurance Proceeds – St. Dympna’s Hospital, fire damage
Ballymote CNU – Donation
Insurance Proceeds – Letterkenny General Hospital, flood damage
Department of Education – Children’s Hospital School
University of Limerick – Clinical Education & Research Centre Project Contribution
NUI Galway – Letterkenny General Hospital Medical Education and Training Unit
Aontacht Phobail Teoranta – due to HSE on liquidation of subsidiary holding
Letterkenny Hospital Association Ltd – Contribution towards Mental Health Unit.
Irish Hospice Foundation – Design and Dignity grant
Friends of Mid West Regional Hospital – Nenagh Ward Upgrade
Charitable Contribution towards Community Nursing Unit, Tuam, Co. Galway
Friends of Bandon Community Hospital – Day Room Extension to the Hospital
University College Cork – CUH Paediatric Projects
Other Miscellaneous Income
Total Capital Income from Other Sources
154 HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Note 14 Proceeds of Disposal of Fixed Asset Account 2018 €’000
Net Proceeds of Disposal
Less Application of Proceeds
Movement in the year
At 1 January
Balance at 31 December
Gross Proceeds of all Disposals in year Less: Net Expenses Incurred on Disposals
Financial Governance
The Multi-Annual Delegated Capital sanction 2019-2022 was issued in December 2019 by the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform.
Note 15 Property, Plant and Equipment Land* Buildings** €’000
Work in
Progress (L&B)
Motor
Vehicles
Equipment
Work in
Progress (P&E)
Total 2019
Cost/Valuation
At 1 January 2019
Accumulated Depreciation at 1 January 2019
Charge for the Year
Disposals
At 31 December 2019
At 1 January 2019
At 31 December 2019
Additions
Transfers from Work in Progress
Disposals
At 31 December 2019
Depreciation
Net Book Values
The current carrying value of land amounting to €1.67bn held by the HSE at 31 December 2019 is based on the 2002 Department of Health Valuation rates.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Building assets held under Finance Leases/Service Concession Arrangements Financial Governance
*/** Relates to Primary Care Centre (PCC) assets acquired under Public Private Partnership (PPP) service concession arrangements.
The ten PCC sites included within Work in Progress (Land and Buildings) at a value of €137m in 2017 were transferred to Buildings during 2018.
All fourteen PCC sites have reached service commencement.
PCC Assets are not depreciated where they have been acquired or are managed under service concession agreements which guarantee residual useful lives and operating capacity at the end of the concession term that would be equivalent to that of the asset when it was first commissioned.
During 2019 the National Paediatric Hospital Development Board completed the building of an outpatient and urgent care centre on the campus of Connolly Hospital.
This has been recorded as a fixed asset addition in 2019.
Note 16 Inventories 2019 €’000
Laboratory Supplies
Pharmacy Supplies
High Tech Pharmacy Inventories
Household Services
Stationery and Office Supplies
Sundries
Medical, Dental and Surgical Supplies
Pharmacy Dispensing Inventories
Blood and Blood Products
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Note 17 Trade and Other Receivables 2018 €’000
Receivables: Patient Debtors – Long Stay Charges
Prepayments and Accrued Income
Department of Health (DoH)
Local Authorities
Payroll Advances
Voluntary Hospitals – Grant Funding Advances
Sundry Receivables
Receivables: Patient Debtors – Private Facilities in Public Hospitals* Receivables: Patient Debtors – Public Inpatient Charges
Payroll Technical Adjustment Additional Superannuation Contributions (ASC) Deductions from Staff Statutory Redundancy Claim
Voluntary Hospitals – National Medical Device Service Contracts
Financial Governance
* Private Healthcare Insurance Income.
In line with the HSE's accounting policy the HSE recognises patient income due from private health insurance companies at the time the service is provided.
During 2017 some insurance companies commenced deductions from claims made by the HSE relating to the time period between the date of admission and the date the Private Insurance Patient form was signed by the patient.
The HSE has disputed these deductions through a legal process and it is expected that this dispute will be heard by the Courts sometime at the end of 2020 present COVID-19 environment allowing.
In line with the HSE's accounting policy a bad and doubtful debt provision is created in relation to debts outstanding for more than one year.
Primary utilisation of the properties can be analysed as follows: Delivery of health and personal social services Health Business Services and Support (including medical card processing etc.)
Total Properties
The 2018 figure has been revised as two properties had been classified as additional properties in error.
These were two new buildings completed in 2018 on existing HSE properties.
During the year there were 57 property additions to the healthcare estate and 31 properties were removed through both disposals and lease terminations.
The net result is an increase of 26 healthcare properties during 2019.
The total number of properties in the HSE healthcare estate at the end of 2019 has been impacted by a combination of routine estate management activities as well as the requirements of specific key healthcare strategies to deliver ongoing rollout of primary care centres and relocation of disability services to community settings.
Note 24 Taxation
The HSE carried out a significant self-review of tax compliance in respect of 2018 with external specialist tax assistance which was completed in 2019.
The self-review was conducted on an agreed risk based assessment across all tax heads for which the HSE needs to account.
The liability to taxes identified in the course of the self-review for 2018 was set out by means of a Self-Correction disclosure and payment (including interest) of €3,128,034 was made to the Revenue Commissioners in September 2019.
The amount represents 0.18% of the overall tax paid by the HSE for that year.
The HSE has a dedicated in house tax team resourced by tax professionals developing a strong relationship with Revenue and with access to external advisors where necessary.
The HSE remains committed to exemplary tax compliance.
Note 25 Contingent Liabilities
General
The HSE is involved in a number of claims involving legal proceedings which may generate liabilities, depending on the outcome of the litigation.
The HSE has insurance cover for professional indemnity, fire and specific all risk claims.
In most cases, such insurance would be sufficient to cover all costs, but this cannot be certain due to indemnity limits and certain policy conditions.
The financial effects of any uninsured contingencies have not been provided in the financial statements.
Patient Private Property Retained Interest Prior to 2005, interest income earned on patients’ private funds was retained by the former Health Boards and used to partially defray the costs incurred in administering approximately 19,000 Patients’ Private Property Accounts.
This action was based on previous legal advice.
Subsequent legal advice taken by the HSE indicated that the Patients’ Private Property Accounts operated under an implied trustee relationship with the patients and, as such, the HSE was obliged to remit interest earned to those patients.
The lack of available historic private patient property records limits the ability of the HSE to estimate the full potential liability and therefore a partial liability only has been provided for in the HSE's financial statements.
The HSE has set up a Steering Group to actively manage this issue to a satisfactory resolution.
Clinical Indemnity Scheme
Details of the contingent liability in respect of the Clinical Indemnity Scheme are set out in Note 11.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
In June 2018, a settlement was agreed between the State and Medical Consultants arising from an alleged breach of contract in relation to the non-implementation of the 2008 Consultants contract.
The settlement specifies that 40% of the retrospective remuneration should be paid in 2019 and the balance in 2020.
The HSE’s estimate of the liability at 31 December 2018 was €198 million.
The total cost of the legal settlement is now estimated at €186m at 31 December 2019.
The amount paid in 2019 was €85m (Clinical Pay).
The estimated remaining liability due is 2020 is €101m.
Note 27 Post Balance Sheet Events
The unprecedented outbreak of the COVID-19 Pandemic presents significant global challenges and uncertainties in all sectors, but in particular on the Health Sector.
The HSE is tasked with the provision of health and personal social services for the citizens of Ireland and is therefore significantly impacted by the COVID-19 outbreak.
The HSE and its staff are playing a major role in the response to the COVID-19 outbreak and is actively taking steps to limit the spread of the outbreak and to ensure resources are available such that appropriate Hospital and Community services are in place to look after those whose health has become impacted by the virus.
There are increased pressures on services and resourcing which have resulted in the requirement for additional funding in 2020 to continue to react and manage the current outbreak.
The HSE has received contingency funding from the Department of Health as reflected in “Ireland’s National Action Plan Response to COVID-19” issued March 2020.
This commitment to additional funding means that the HSE considers that it is still appropriate to apply the going concern concept.
There is no impact on the financial statements of the HSE for 2019.
HSE management are fully aware of the potential additional risks due to the disruption of the normal activities of the HSE.
While it is not possible to determine all the likely impacts financial or otherwise due to the evolving nature of the pandemic, the HSE continues to monitor the situation and plan accordingly.
Note 28 Related Party Transactions In the normal course of business, the Health Service Executive may approve grants and may also enter into other contractual arrangements with undertakings in which Health Service Directorate members are employed or otherwise interested.
The Health Service Executive adopts procedures in accordance with the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform’s Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies, the Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 and the Standards in Public Office Act 2001, in relation to the disclosure of interests of Health Service Directorate members.
These procedures have been adhered to by the Directorate members and the HSE during the year.
During 2019, a member of staff on secondment to the HSE from a funded body served as a member of the Directorate.
No other member of the Directorate held an interest with any related parties.
From June 28 2019, a number of interests were noted by board members.
It was deemed that none of the interests disclosed have a material commercial and/or financial impact on the HSE.
It was also noted that no investments in unlisted companies, partnerships and other forms of business, major shareholdings and beneficial interests were disclosed.
No board members disclosed gifts or hospitality offered by external bodies in the last twelve months.
No board members noted any contractual relationship with the HSE and no board members noted any other conflicts not covered elsewhere.
Key Management Personnel
All Board members, in addition to the HSE’s Executive Management Team including the Chief Executive Officer, are considered to be key management of the HSE.
Overall remuneration in relation to serving key management personnel, including those that were appointed and resigned during the year, is €1.7m (2018: €1.1m).
The Board members are in receipt of fees and other than as disclosed in Note 2 all other key management’s remuneration comprise of basic pay only.
With the exception of the CEO, the other appointed members of the Executive Management Team are members of the HSE pension scheme (and the Voluntary Hospital Superannuation Scheme in the case of the seconded member), and their pension entitlements do not extend beyond the standard entitlements of the public sector model scheme.
Note 29 Approval of Financial Statements The financial statements were approved by the Board on the 13 May 2020.
Active Retirement Ireland
Age Action Ireland
Age and Opportunity
AIDS Help West
All in Care
Alpha One Foundation
Anchor Treatment Centre
ANEW Support Service
Name of Agency
Financial Governance
Analysis of Grants to Outside Agencies in Note 8 and Note 13
Acquired Brain Injury Ireland (formerly Peter Bradley Foundation)
Aiseanna Tacaíochta
Aislinn Centre, Kilkenny
All Ireland Institute of Hospice & Palliative Care (AIIHPC)
Alzheimer Society of Ireland
An Saol Foundation
Ana Liffey Drug Project Ann’s Home Care
Áras Mhuire Day Care Centre (North Tipperary Community Services)
ARC Cancer Support Centre
Arthritis Ireland
Asperger Syndrome Association of Ireland (ASPIRE)
Associated Charities Trust
Association for the Healing of Institutional Abuse (AHIA) (Previously known as the Aislinn Centre, Dublin)
Ballyfermot Local Drug and Alcohol Task Force CLG
Ballymun Local Drugs Task Force
Ballymun Regional Youth Resource (BYRY)
Ballymun Youth Action Project (YAP)
Ballyphehane and Togher Community Resource Centre
Barretstown Camp
Be Independent Home Care
Name of Agency Anne Sullivan Foundation for Deaf/Blind Applewood Homecare Ltd
Ard Aoibhinn Centre
Ardee Day Care Centre Arklow South Wicklow Home Help Service Arlington Novas Ireland
Association of Parents and Friends of The Mentally Handicapped Asthma Society of Ireland
Ballyfermot Chapelizod Partnership
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2019
Beaufort Day Care Centre
Beaumont Hospital
Belong to Youth Services Ltd
Bergerie Trust
Blakestown and Mountview Youth Initiative (BMYI)
Blanchardstown Local Drugs Task Force
Blanchardstown Youth Service
Bloomfield Health Services
Bodywhys The Eating Disorder Association of Ireland
Bon Secours Sisters
Bray Community Addiction Team
Bray Travellers Group
Blanchardstown and Inner City Home Helps
Brothers of Charity Services Ireland
Cabra Resource Centre
Cairdeas Centre Carlow
Cancer Care West
Cappagh National Orthopaedic Hospital
Caredoc GP Co-operative
Care of the Aged, West Kerry Careworld
Carlow Social Services
Carlow/Kilkenny Home Care Team
Carnew Community Care Centre
Carrigoran Nursing Home – Day Care Centre
Catholic Institute for Deaf People (CIDP)
Name of Agency
Carlow Day Care Centre (Askea Community Services)
Centres for Independent Living (CIL)
Children’s Health Ireland
Childrens Sunshine Home
ChildVision (St Joseph’s School For The Visually Impaired)
Chrysalis Community Drug Project
Cill Dara Ar Aghaid
Circle of Friends Cancer Support Centre
Clarecare Ltd Incorporating Clare Social Service Council
Clareville Court Day Centre
Clondalkin Addiction Support Programme (CASP)
Clondalkin Drugs Task Force
Clarecastle Daycare Centre Claregalway and District Day Care Centre
Community Response, Dublin
Community Substance Misuse Team Limerick
CONNECT – The National Adult Counselling Service (NOVA HELPLINE)
Cluain Training & Enterprise Ctr
CLUB 91 (Formerly Chez Nous Service), Sligo Co-Action West Cork
Cobh General Hospital
Community Games
 Coombe Women’s Hospital
COPE Foundation
COPE Galway
Cork Association for Autism
Cork Foyer Project
Cork Mental Health Association
Cork Social and Health Education Project (CSHEP)
CROI (West of Ireland Cardiology Foundation)
Delta Centre Carlow
Diabetes Federation of Ireland
Disability & Home Support Services Wexford
Donnycarney/Beaumont Local Care
Donore Community Development
Down Syndrome Ireland
Drogheda Community Services
Drogheda Homeless Aid Association
Dromcollogher and District Respite Care Centre
Drumkeerin Care Of The Elderly
Drumlin House
Dublin 12 Local Drug and Alcohol Task Force CLG
Dublin AIDS Alliance (DAA) Ltd
Darndale Belcamp Drug Awareness
Daughters of Charity
Disability Federation of Ireland (DFI)
Drumcondra Home Help
Dublin Dental Hospital
Dublin North East Drugs Task Force
Dublin Region Homeless Executive
Dun Laoghaire Home Help
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Community Addiction Team
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Local Drugs Task Force
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Outreach Project
Dublin West Homehelp
Edward Worth Library
Enable Ireland
Environmental Protection Agency
Epilepsy Ireland
Fatima Groups United
Ferns Diocesan Youth Services (FDYS)
Festina Lente Foundation
Fettercairn Drug Rehabilitation Project
Finglas Addiction Support Team
Finglas Cabra Local Drugs and Alcohol Task Force
Forum The North West Connemara Rural Project
Gaelic Athletic Association
Galway Hospice Foundation
Gateway Community Care
Gay Health Network
Genio Trust
Family Carers Ireland
Fingal Home Care
Finglas Home Help/Care Organisation
Capital Grants
Guardian Ad Litem and Rehabilitation Office (GALRO)
HADD Family Support Group
Hail Housing Association for Integrated Living
Hesed House
Holy Angels Carlow, Special Needs Day Care Centre
Holy Family School
Holy Ghost Hospital
Homecare Solutions Ltd
IADP Inter-Agency Drugs Project UISCE
Immigrant Counselling and Psychotherapy (ICAP)
Inchicore Community Drugs Team
Inclusion Ireland
International Organisation for Migration Screening
Íontas Arts & Community Resource Centre, Castleblanyey
Irish Advocacy Network
Irish Association for Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus (IASBH)
Irish Cancer Society
Irish College of General Practitioners
Inspire Ireland Foundation Ltd 170
Irish Guide Dogs for the Blind
Irish Haemophilia Society (IHS)
Irish Heart Foundation
Irish Hospice Foundation
Irish Kidney Association (IKA)
Irish Motor Neurone Disease Association
Irish Prison Service
K Doc (GP Out of Hours Service)
KARE, Newbridge
Kerry Parents and Friends Association
Kildare Youth Services (KYS)
Killinarden (KARP)
Kilmaley Voluntary Housing Association
Kiltoghert Womens Group
Kingsriver Community
Leitrim Association of People with Disabilities (LAPWD)
Leitrim Development Company
Irish Family Planning Association (IFPA)
Irish Society for Autism
Irish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (ISPCC)
Jobstown Assisting Drug Dependency Project (JAAD Project)
KARE Social Services, Raheny
Lifford Clonleigh Resource Centre
Limerick Social Services Council
Limerick Youth Service Community Training Centre
Liscarne Court Senior Citizens
Little Angels Hostel Letterkenny
Longford Community Resources Ltd
Longford Social Services Committee
Lorcan O’ Toole Day Care Centre
Lourdes Day Care Centre
Mahon Community Creche
Marian Court Welfare Home Clonmel
McGann Family Home Care Services
Meath County Council
Meath Partnership
Mental Health Associations (MHAs)
Mental Health Ireland
MS Ireland – Multiple Sclerosis Society of Ireland
Mulhuddart/Corduff Community Drugs Team
Name of Agency
Mounttown Neighbourhood Youth Project
Muscular Dystrophy Ireland
Nasc (The Irish Immigrant Support Centre)
National Association of Housing for the Visually Impaired Ltd
National Childhood Network (NCN)
National Council for the Blind of Ireland (NCBI)
National Federation of Voluntary Bodies in Ireland
National Maternity Hospital
National Nutrition Surveillance Centre UCD
Nazareth House, Mallow
Nazareth House, Sligo
Neart Le Cheile
Newport Social Services, Day Care Centre
North Doc Medical Services
North Dublin Inner City Homecare and Home Help Services
North Tipperary Leader Partnership
North West Alcohol Forum
Northside Partnership
Northstar Family Support Project
Nurse on Call – Homecare Package
O’Connell Court Residential and Day Care
Offaly Local Development Company
Offaly Travellers Movement
One In Four
Open Door Day Centre
Order of Malta
Ossory Youth Services
Peamount Hospital
Pieta House
Post Polio Support Group (PPSG)
Prague House
R K Respite Services Ltd
RADE (Recovery through Art Drama and Education)
Radius Housing Association
Praxis Care Group
Rialto Community Development
Rialto Community Drugs Team
Rialto Partnership Company
Ringsend and District Response to Drugs
Rosedale Residential Home
Rotunda Hospital
Royal College of Physicians
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland
Royal Hospital Donnybrook
Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital
Ruhama Women’s Project
Rutland Centre
Sandymount Home Help
Saoirse Addiction Treatment Center
SAOL Project
Shalamar Finiskilin Housing Association
Shankhill Old Folks Association
Shannondoc Ltd (GP Out Of Hours Service)
Simon Communities of Ireland
Simplicitas Ltd
Sisters of Charity
Sisters of Charity St Mary’s Centre for the Blind and Visually Impaired
Sligo Family Centre
Sisters of Mercy
Skibereen Community and Family Resource Centre
Society of St Vincent De Paul (SVDP) Sophia Housing Association
South Doc GP Co-operative
South West Mayo Development Company
Southern Gay Health Project
Southside Partnership
Spinal Injuries Ireland
Spiritan Asylum Services Initiative (SPIRASI)
St Aengus Community Action Group
St Andrew’s Resource Centre
St Bridget’s Day Care Centre
St Carthage’s House Lismore
St Dominic’s Community Response Project
St Fiacc’s House, Graiguecullen
St Gabriel’s School and Centre
St Hilda’s Services For The Mentally Handicapped, Athlone
St James’ Hospital
St James’ Hospital, Jonathan Swift Hostels St John Bosco Youth Centre
St John of God Hospitaller Services
St John’s Hospital
St Joseph’s Foundation
St Joseph’s Home For The Elderly
St Kevin’s Home Help Service
St Laurence O’ Toole SSC
St Lazarians House, Bagenalstown
St Luke’s Home
St Michael’s Day Care Centre
St Michael’s Hospital, Dun Laoghaire
St Michael’s House
St Monica’s Community Development Committee
St Monica’s Nursing Home
St Patrick’s Hospital/Marymount
St Patrick’s Special School
St Patrick’s Wellington Road
St Vincent’s Hospital Fairview
St Patrick’s Centre, Kilkenny (Sisters of Charity)
St Vincent’s University Hospital, Elm Park
St Margaret’s Donnybrook (IRL-IASD)
St Paul’s Child and Family Care Centre
Stillorgan Home Help
Tabor House, Navan
Tallaght Rehabilitation Project
Tallaght Travellers Youth Service
Templemore Day Care Centre
The Avalon Centre, Sligo
The Beeches Residential Home
The Eating Disorder Centre Cork
The Irish Forum for Global Health (IFGH)
The Irish Men’s Sheds Association (IMSA)
The Killarney Asylum Seekers Initiative (KASI)
The Mens Development Network
The North Inner City Drugs and Alcohol Task Force
The Sexual Health Centre
Tipperary Association for Special Needs
Tipperary Hospice Movement
Tolka River Project
Tralee Womens Forum
Transgender Equality Network Ireland
Traveller Support Group Galway
Travellers Education & Development Association, Tuam
Trinity College Dublin
Tullow Day Care Centre
University College Dublin
University of Limerick
Valentia Community Hospital
Waterford and South Tipperary Community Youth Service
Waterford Community Childcare
Waterford Hospice Movement
Well Woman Clinics
Wexford Homecare Service
Wexford Local Development
White Oaks Addiction Treatment Centre
Youth Work Ireland
Westdoc (GP Out Of Hours Service) Western Care Association
Western Region Drugs Task Force Western Traveller and Intercultural Development Association Westgate Foundation
Total Grants to Outside Agencies (see Note 8 for Revenue; see Note 13 for Capital)
* Additional payments, not shown above, may have been made to some agencies related to services provided.
** Agencies with grants exceeding €100,000 in either year are shown.
All other grants are included at “Total Grants under €100,000”.
Accordingly, the 2018 comparatives above have been re–stated where appropriate.
Improving People’s Health and Wellbeing
Healthcare activity in 2018…
Enabling better population health and wellbeing
10,608 smokers received intensive cessation support
100,000 people completed a structured patient education programme for diabetes
infectious disease outbreaks managed
170,583 women had a mammogram
339,161 women had a smear test
There was a case of tuberculosis
There was a case of meningococcal disease
Healthcare activity in 2018…
…supporting people in primary care in the community and at home
A paediatric home care package was provided
newborn babies
hepatitis C
opiod substance replacement
Travelling
Healthcare activity in 2018…
…supporting people with disabilities
…supporting the achievement of optimal mental health
An hour of home support (excluding hours from intensive home care packages) was delivered to over 53,000 people
intensive home care packages
inter-hospital transfer
supporting people with palliative care needs
mobile intensive care services
children’s ambulance
neonatal unit
the National Pediatric Behavior Program
specialised transfer units
Part I
Statement from the Director General
Our Health Service
Our Corporate Plan
Our Organisation
Our Population
Listening to our Service Users
Building a Better Health Service
Quality and Safety
Community Healthcare
Primary Care
Primary Care Reimbursement Service Disability Services
Mental Health
Older Persons’ Services
Palliative Care
Community Healthcare Organisations
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Services
Hospital Groups
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Part II
Financial Governance
Operating and Financial Overview 2018 Governance Statement and Directorate Members’ Report Statement on Internal Control
Comptroller and Auditor General Report for Presentation to the Oireachtas Financial Statements
Notes to the Financial Statements
Appendices
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Statement from the Director General
Statement from the Director General It gives me great pleasure to present the Annual Report and Financial Statements for the Health Service Executive (HSE) for 2018.
The past year has seen a number of significant events which have been exciting but also challenging.
As part of the next important step on our reform journey we are working with our colleagues in the Sláintecare Programme Implementation Office to develop an Action Plan which will deliver real change during 2019 as the first year of this ten-year journey, changes which are widely recognised as being essential given the changing demographic profile and the expectations around clinical governance and standards.
We are continuing to deliver services in an environment where the population is growing, the number of people seeking to access services is higher than ever before and where public expectations for quality services, understandably, continue to increase.
New HSE Board
The HSE has welcomed and is fully supportive of Sláintecare which presents a ten-year vision to transform Ireland’s health and social care services.
In particular, the publication of the Sláintecare Implementation Strategy during the year represents real progress as it provides the framework for a comprehensive reform programme which is system-wide.
We now have a direction for the next ten years and the actions to be taken in the first three years of the Sláintecare implementation process.
The focus is on establishing the building blocks for a significant shift in the way in which health and social care services are delivered in Ireland.
In addition, the membership of the Sláintecare Implementation Advisory Council was announced.
It comprises 23 members from a range of backgrounds, including a number of clinical leaders, patient advocates and service user representatives along with a number of independent change experts from outside the health service who will bring expertise and an independent perspective.
This is a critical element in the implementation of the Sláintecare vision with the council providing advice and support on the delivery of the Sláintecare Implementation Strategy.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
A key Sláintecare recommendation is the establishment of an independent Board for the HSE in order to strengthen governance in the health system.
Under the Health Service Executive (Governance) Bill 2018, to be enacted in early 2019, the Board will be the governing body of the HSE and will be accountable to the Minister for Health for the performance of its functions.
The CEO of the HSE will be accountable to the Board.
Priority issues for the new HSE Board will include: •
delivering effective and safe services within the resources allocated
developing and implementing an effective performance management and accountability system in the HSE
developing a plan for building public trust and confidence in the HSE and the wider health service
ensuring the HSE’s full support for and implementation of the Government’s programme of health reform as set out in the Sláintecare Implementation Strategy.
I welcome the announcement during the year of the appointment of Ciarán Devane as the incoming Chair of the new Board and can assure him of the full support of all staff working in the health service.
We look forward to the appointment of the remaining members of the Board prior to the enactment of the legislation.
We also look forward to working with the new Board once established and, in particular to developing a three-year Corporate Plan that reflects the ambition of Sláintecare.
Statement from the Director General
CervicalCheck Programme
Service Delivery
The past year was extremely challenging for the health service as a result of issues which arose from the audit process in CervicalCheck, our national cervical screening programme.
At the centre of this was our failure to communicate with the women involved.
These women should have been informed and the HSE apologised unreservedly for our short-comings in that regard.
I reiterate that apology now.
Through the CervicalCheck programme over 100,000 cases of abnormal cervical cells have been detected and treated since 2008 – many of these could have developed into cancer if not detected through screening.
It is essential that the public has confidence in this vital service.
While I believe that recent annual increases in the HSE’s annual budget allocation have helped us to make significant improvements in many areas of our operations, there are still significant challenges in terms of service delivery.
In particular, we face challenges with waiting times for elective inpatient treatment and outpatient appointments.
We must ensure that we continue to maximise efficiency in the delivery of these services.
We also need to ensure that we are delivering services as close as possible to patients, with a focus on removing our over-reliance on hospital-based service delivery through the development of appropriate community-based services delivered within the Community Health Network.
A properly resourced capital building and equipment replacement programme will help to deliver services that are both accessible and safe.
In this regard, we welcomed the publication of the final report of the Scoping Inquiry by Dr Gabriel Scally and his team.
I acknowledge the focus and commitment of Dr Scally and his team and the patient-centred approach that they have taken.
The recommendations contained in the report are comprehensive and far ranging and we have moved swiftly to implement all 50 recommendations through an extensive implementation plan which we published and update on a monthly basis.
More importantly however is the absolute requirement of our health service to learn from issues like this to ensure that we don’t repeat our mistakes.
During the year ahead we will continue to develop our systems of open disclosure to ensure that we inform our patients of all significant events in a timely, honest and transparent manner.
Uptake of the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine among girls showed a marked increase in 2018.
We look forward to the extension of this vital vaccine to boys in 2019 and to the introduction of HPV screening over the next twelve months which will both aid in the eventual eradication of cervical and other cancers.
Patients, Service User and Staff Engagement
One of the great attributes of a strong and vibrant organisation is its willingness and ability to receive and act on feedback from its key stakeholders.
This will help us to ensure that we truly live our values of Care, Compassion, Trust and Learning and to ensure that we develop a health service that is driven by quality and safety.
During 2018 we carried out our second annual National Patient Experience Survey which was run jointly with the Department of Health (DoH) and the Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA).
The results of this survey were encouraging and have led to hospital specific action plans to address issues raised.
We also conducted a system-wide staff engagement survey where people working in agencies across the public health system were given an opportunity to share their views and opinions on their health service.
As with the views and suggestions of our service users, we will seek to ensure that we address areas of concern and also accentuate what is good in what we do.
Following the Referendum in May 2018, extensive planning and engagement took place to prepare for the introduction of a safe, high quality termination of pregnancy service.
A contract was agreed to allow general practitioners (GPs) to provide terminations at nine weeks of pregnancy and under in a primary care setting.
The hospital based service commenced in nine hospitals, increasing to ten in early 2019.
The possibility that the United Kingdom will depart from the European Union (EU) without an agreement continues to be a possibility.
This has potentially significant implications for this country and particularly for the delivery of health services.
In this regard, I was pleased to see the level of inter-agency co-operation across the health sector in the contingency planning process.
I am confident that we will have the necessary arrangements in place to ensure the continuity of services for those we serve.
Thank you
In conclusion, I wish to express my gratitude to all staff working in the HSE, across our Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs), Hospital Groups, Ambulance Service and National Services.
I also wish to give my thanks to all the members of the Directorate, Leadership Team and our Risk, Audit and other Committees.
Your commitment, professionalism and dedication are vital to ensuring that we strive to provide the health service that our population deserves.
Director General, Health Service Executive
Under the Health Act 2004 (as amended), the HSE is required to submit a Corporate Plan every three years, specifying the key objectives of the HSE for the period concerned.
The most recent Corporate Plan 2015-2017 concluded at the end of 2017 and in anticipation of the Sláintecare Implementation Strategy, it was agreed that a one-year update to the Corporate Plan would be developed.
A healthier Ireland with a high quality health service valued by all
Mission
This update builds on the strategic direction outlined in the Corporate Plan 2015-2017 and reflects additional strategic elements including those priorities described in the National Service Plan 2018.
 People in Ireland are supported by health and social care services to achieve their full potential
The Corporate Goals and Objectives 2018 sets out how we aim to improve our health service.
Our aim is to develop a first-rate service, available to people where and when they need it and our vision is to develop a healthier Ireland with a high quality health service valued by all.
This vision is accompanied by a mission statement that outlines how this vision can be realised.
People in Ireland can access safe, compassionate and quality care when they need it  
People in Ireland can be confident that we will deliver the best health outcomes and value through optimising our resources
Provide fair, equitable and timely access to quality, safe health services that people need
Underpinning our goals and objectives are the values: Care, Compassion, Trust and Learning.
Over the following pages, both achievements and challenges in 2018 are outlined.
Our Organisation
annual absence rate
gross expenditure on primary care
gross expenditure on disability and older persons’ services
Medical and Dental
Nursing and Midwifery
Health and Social Care
Management and Administrative
General Support
Patient and Client Care
This Annual Report describes what was accomplished in 2018 to meet the priorities set out in our National Service Plan 2018.
In meeting our legislative requirements under the Health Act 2004 (as amended), this Annual Report also reports progress against our Capital Plans and provides detailed financial statements for the organisation.
Governance
Following the enactment of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013, the HSE Directorate was established as the governing body of the HSE.
The Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013 allows the Minister for Health to issue directions to the HSE on the implementation of Ministerial and government policies and objectives and to determine priorities to which the HSE must have regard in preparing its service plan.
The HSE must comply with directives issued by the Minister for Health under this and the Health Act 2004.
In 2018, the Directorate had collective responsibility as the governing body of the HSE and the authority to perform the functions of the Executive.
It was accountable to the Minister for the performance of these functions.
The Director General, as Chairman of the Directorate, accounted on behalf of the Directorate to the Minister and was responsible for managing and controlling generally the administration and business of the HSE.
The HSE exercises a wide range of statutory functions which may have significant implications both for individuals and for the public generally.
The legislation recognises that neither the Directorate nor the Director General could exercise all of these functions personally and provides for a formal system of delegation under sections 16C and 16H of the Health Act 2004 (as amended).
This Delegations Policy Framework sets out the framework and supporting policy guidelines that underpin good governance regarding the system of delegation of statutory functions throughout the HSE.
This allows these functions to be undertaken on an operational basis through the Leadership Team and their supporting structures within the organisation.
To provide assistance and advice in relation to the performance of its functions, the Directorate has established a number of Committees including an Audit Committee and a Risk Committee, each of which comprises one appointed National Director and external nominees.
These Directorate Committees act in an advisory capacity and have no executive function.
For information on the role and operation of these committees, see the Governance Statement and Directorate Members’ Report in Part II Financial Governance of this Annual Report and also an organisation structure as at 31/12/18 in Appendix 2.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Under the Health Act 2004, the HSE is required to have in place a Code of Governance, which was updated in 2015 to set out the principles and practices associated with good governance.
The Statement on Internal Control in Part II Financial Governance of this Annual Report reflects our compliance with the requirements of the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies 2016.
The enactment of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Bill 2018 will provide for the re-establishment of a HSE Board in 2019 to strengthen independent oversight and performance of the HSE, with the Chair of the Board selected in 2018.
The establishment of the Board is an important step in improving governance arrangements and is a priority in the implementation of Sláintecare.
The HSE Executive will work proactively with the new Chair and the new Board to ensure it can work effectively as well as responding efficiently and productively to a range of new governance requirements stemming from these new arrangements.
Our Workforce
We are committed to putting people at the heart of everything we do, delivering high quality healthcare to our patients, service users, communities and the wider population.
The Health Services People Strategy 2015-2018, recognising the vital role of staff at all levels of our organisation, was developed and implemented to engage, develop, value and support our workforce in addressing the many challenges in delivering health and personal social services.
An updated strategy is in development, to further build on this work.
Staff engagement •
Staff feedback is an important method of identifying opportunities for improvement and one way to do this is through the National Staff Survey, conducted every two years to assess current staff opinions.
In 2018, 15% of staff participated in the survey with the majority of responses showing improvements since the last survey was conducted, an indication that the policies being implemented (Health Services People Strategy 20152018, Dignity at Work Policy for the Health Service, Leadership training, etc.) are having a positive effect.
Key findings (some of which can be seen on page 10) will be used to further improve the working lives of staff, leading to better services for healthcare users and better care for patients.
Our Organisation
Improving Communication
Thirty-nine healthcare staff completed the HSE Irish Sign Language (ISL) Programme this year.
Knowledge of ISL assists communication and good customer and patient care support, helping to break down barriers that may be experienced by deaf employees and service users.
The National Staff Engagement Forum met five times during the year.
The forum promotes staff engagement, encouraging staff to have a strong sense of connection to the organisation.
Recruitment and retention •
A recruitment awareness campaign was run at the beginning of the year to which a total of 2,914 individuals responded from Ireland and abroad.
The campaign demonstrated the benefits and reach of a social and digital media approach in creating recruitment awareness.
A new national Strategy for Doctors’ Health and Wellbeing 2018-2021 was announced, outlining standards to apply from the first day in medical school up to and including retirement, and addressing the unique challenges at every stage of a doctor’s working life.
A pilot programme, delivered in close collaboration and partnership with the Leinster Institute of Professional Development (LIPD), is enabling healthcare support workers to train as healthcare assistants.
Directors of Nursing in South Tipperary General Hospital and St. Patrick’s Hospital, Cashel have worked closely with the LIPD to ensure the course is highly practical and is applicable and transferable to both the acute and community setting.
A training programme was rolled out for Health and Social Care Professionals (HSCPs) to equip HSCP supervisors with the knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary for the effective engagement in and delivery of professional supervision as part of their role.
More than 25 professions were eligible to apply for the programme. •
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Our Organisation
Findings from the National Staff Survey 2018
Job Satisfaction
Job Motivation
My job gives me a sense of personal fulfilment
I am enthusiastic about my job
I am happy in my job
I look forward to going to work
Satisfaction with job at the present time
Motivation in current job
Relationship with Line Manager
I would recommend my organisation as an employer
Optimistic about future within organisation
I have one-to-one meetings with my line manager
My line manager delegates effectively
My line manager motivates me to perform at the highest levels
Dignity at Work
Subjected to assault, verbal or physical, in my organisation in the past two years
Experienced bullying and/or harassment in my organisation in the past two years
Experienced discrimination at work in the last 12 months
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Our Organisation
Pictured at the first Multicultural Celebration Day to be held at University Hospital Limerick are Kayla Lingat and Dr Abrar Haier.
UL Hospitals Group has over 300 employees from 50 different countries including the Philippines, Brazil, South Africa, Poland, the UK, Sudan and Pakistan.
Changing Gears is a course designed to help workers aged 50 years and older plan their goals for the next ten years.
It also aims to help staff in facing change and challenges both in their workplaces and in their personal lives.
Three-day Changing Gears programmes were facilitated with the support of the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation as part of their Transitions in Later Life programme.
Employment levels
The health service is the largest employer in the state with 117,857 whole-time equivalents (WTEs) employed by the HSE and section 38 agencies, at 31st December 2018.
Since 2017, overall staffing levels have increased by 3.1% or 3,560 WTEs.
All staff categories showed growth in 2018 compared with 2017.
The largest growth was seen in patient and client care (1,011 WTEs), including ambulance staff, followed by nursing and midwifery (867 WTEs) which is the largest staff category and continues to constitute around one-third of the health workforce.
Medical and dental staffing rose by 346 WTEs.
European Working Time Directive
A key focus for the health service continues to be improving compliance with the European Working Time Directive (EWTD) amongst NCHDs and social care workers.
As of end December 2018, there was:
98% received 11 hour daily rest breaks or equivalent compensatory rest (0% increase on December 2017).
98% compliance with 30 minute breaks (1% decrease on December 2017).
99% compliance with weekly/fortnightly rest or equivalent compensatory rest (0% increase on December 2017).
Medical and dental
Nursing and midwifery
Health and social care professionals
Management and administrative
General support •
Data source: Health Service Personnel Census.
• 97% did not work more than 24 hours on-site on call (0% increase on December 2017).
Note: Difference in 2017 WTEs against that shown in Annual Report 2017 is due to the inclusion of home helps in the reporting.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Our Organisation
Nursing and Midwifery
Our nurses and midwives make up approximately one third of the health service workforce and are at the frontline in ensuring service delivery that reflects our organisational values of Care, Compassion, Trust and Learning.
A number of initiatives were developed and progressed during the year to support nursing and midwifery services in meeting the health and wellbeing needs of the population.
Shaping the Future of Intellectual Disability Nursing in Ireland was launched.
The report, which was developed in conjunction with the Office of Nursing and Midwifery Services and with services, sets out a clear direction for the future role of intellectual disability nursing ensuring the best possible health and social care is delivered to people with an intellectual disability.
A Guiding Framework for the Development of Registered Advanced Nurse Practitioners – Acute Medicine was published.
Its aim is to ensure that all acute medical patients have a better patient experience with improved communication, receiving safe, quality care with timely diagnosis and correct treatment in an appropriate environment.
Guidelines and policies were produced on a number of practice development initiatives including: –
HSE National Wound Management Guidelines.
National nurse and midwife medicinal product prescribing policy.
Quality Care-Metrics are quantifiable measures that capture the quality of the nursing and midwifery care process in relation to agreed evidence-based standards.
A national research study was completed during the year to identify the important areas of nursing and midwifery care that should be measured, reflecting on the processes by which we provide care, and the values underpinning practice.
The research resulted in a suite of seven reports that outline a suite of metrics and indicators for the following areas: acute care, older persons, mental health, intellectual disability, midwifery, children’s and public health nursing.
The Caring Behaviours Assurance System – Ireland (CBAS-I), an evidence-based system for assuring the delivery of safe care, was extended to the UL Hospitals Group in 2018.
The Digital Professional Development Planning Framework was launched to enable nurses and midwives to identify short and long term professional goals for the benefit of themselves, their service users and the organisations in which they work.
The evaluation report on the implementation of electronic rostering into Letterkenny University Hospital was launched, the findings of which will be used to guide the roll-out of eRostering to other hospitals throughout the country.
The eRostering system is used to create and manage staff rosters, align rosters with service demands, record staff attendance and report compliance with employment law.
Education and training: –
605 nurses/midwives were supported to undertake leadership training.
16,000 staff accessed the Clinical Leadership Competency on-line resource.
1,183 nurses or midwives have authority to prescribe medicines.
386 nurses or midwives have authority to prescribe ionising radiation (x-ray).
1,500 nurses and midwives were sponsored to undertake postgraduate education programmes.
3,622 continuing education programmes were provided to 37,893 nurses, midwives and healthcare assistants through the centres of nursing and midwifery education.
During Storm Emma, healthcare staff clearly demonstrated that care for our patients and service users is at the heart of everything we do.
Key services were able to continue due to the dedication of those who found ways of getting to and staying at work. Additional information on the impact of
Storm Emma can be found throughout this Annual Report.
Staff at Our Lady’s Hospital, Crumlin, during Storm Emma.
Pay and Staffing Strategy and Funded Workforce Plans
The 2018 Pay and Staffing Strategy was a continuation of the 2017 strategy, central to which is compliance with allocated pay expenditure budgets.
These budgets are set out at different levels within the organisation through annual funded workforce plans and are robustly monitored, managed and controlled.
This process was further enhanced in the last quarter of the year in line with the Performance and Accountability Framework.
An integrated approach, supported by National HR and Finance, focused on the aim to reduce and/or control pay costs and implement cost containment plans, in addition to maximising the performance and productivity of the health workforce.
Finance
Acute voluntary hospitals €2.239bn (52%).
Non-acute agencies €2.044bn (48%).
Over 2,150 agencies were funded, with over 4,800 separate funding arrangements in place.
Nine agencies accounted for over 50% of the funding.
Work continued to enhance governance arrangements with section 38 and section 39 funded agencies.
In particular: •
Governance documentation for 2018 was again made available to the operational system from the beginning of the previous November, with a substantial number of Service Arrangements and Grant Aid Agreements being completed and signed by agencies before the end of February.
Briefing sessions on the governance framework for both HSE staff and staff from agencies were held in all CHOs during November and December.
The Annual Compliance Statement process continued, which requires all section 38 and section 39 agencies (which are funded by more than €3m annually) to submit a statement annually to the HSE confirming their compliance with good governance practice in the previous year.
The Annual Compliance Statement process covers approximately 93% of the funding released to section 38 and section 39 agencies.
These statements were reviewed and matters requiring further clarification were addressed with the agencies concerned.
The review of governance at Board and Executive level in section 38 agencies made good progress with a further 18 reviews finalised in 2018 and 22 reviews completed to date.
Preliminary work on the establishment of Contract Management Support Units (CMSUs) was concluded in 2018 and four pilot CMSUs will be established in 2019.
Total capital expenditure in 2018 was €528 million (m) including €468.4m for capital projects and €59.6m for ICT capital projects.
This included capital grants to voluntary agencies of €180.3m.
Further information on capital and ICT infrastructure developments can be found on pages 102-104.
Payroll
The overall pay bill of the health service, excluding voluntary service providers and superannuation, increased by €224m (4.8%) in 2018 to a total of €4.9bn.
Basic pay increased by €204m (6.0%) and other allowances increased by €30m (5.3%).
Governance arrangements with the non-statutory sector
The HSE provided funding of €4.3bn to non-statutory agencies to deliver health and personal social services:
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
85% of people perceive their health to be very good or good
increase in population since 2017
Life expectancy
ex-smokers in Ireland
25% of population are children aged between 0 and 17 years
Over 4.8m people live in Ireland (Central Statistics Office (CSO), 2018).
There was an overall increase of 64,500 people from April 2017 to April 2018, the largest annual increase since 2008.
The population in 2018 has grown by an estimated 2% since the 2016 Census.
The population is growing across all regions and age groups, with the most significant growth seen in the older age groups.
Latest population projections released by the CSO indicate that this population growth is set to continue for at least the next two decades.
Assuming moderate changes in migration and fertility rates, the total population is projected to reach 5.64m by 2038 with more than one in five people expected to be aged 65 years or over.
Notwithstanding this growth in the older population, in 2016 approximately a quarter of our population are children aged 0-17 years.
Ageing population
The number of people aged 65 years and over has increased in the period between 2011 and 2016 Census from 11.6% to 13.3% and by 35% since 2009, which is considerably higher than the EU average of 16% over the same period.
It is projected that the number of people aged 65 years and over will increase by 21,969 (3.3%) in 2019 and 23,327 (3.3%) in 2020.
Similarly, the number of adults aged 85 years and over will increase by 3,116 (4.3%) in 2019 and by 3,369 (4.5%) in 2020.
This continuing growth is due mainly to medical innovations, enhanced treatments and improved lifestyles.
Living longer however brings with it challenges such as chronic disease, social isolation, disabilities and cognitive loss which have major implications for the future planning and provision of health services.
Birth rates
There were 62,053 births in 2017 and live birth numbers are gradually decreasing year on year with a 2.9% decrease between 2016 and 2017.
This is mainly due to the decline in recent years of the number of women in child-bearing age groups and will in turn result in a steady reduction in the number of births over the coming decade.
Despite reductions in the number of births in recent years, the fertility rate in Ireland, at 1.82%, remains the third highest in the EU.
The second highest rate is in France and the highest rate is in Sweden.
Life expectancy in Ireland is now above the EU average having increased by almost two and a half years since 2005.
The greatest gains in life expectancy however have been achieved in the older age groups, showing lower mortality rates from conditions such as heart disease and cancer.
People living longer show that we are managing to prevent and treat diseases more effectively.
Mortality rates from circulatory system diseases decreased by 31.5% between 2008 and 2017, and cancer death rates decreased by 11.3% over the same period.
Transport accident mortality rates have fallen by 44.5% in the past decade (Health in Ireland – Key Trends 2018, DoH).
Suicide rates have decreased by 5.5% between 2005 and 2014 (CSO 2018).
Survival rates from breast, cervical, colon and rectal cancer have improved in the last 15 years.
However, with the exception of rectal cancer, the five year survival rates between 2000 and 2004 and between 2010 and 2014 are lower in Ireland than the average for Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries.
Chronic disease
The three most common chronic diseases are cancer, cardiovascular disease and respiratory disease and these give rise to three quarters of deaths in Ireland.
It is estimated that over 1.07m people over the age of 18 years currently have one or more chronic diseases (based on analysis of The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing (TILDA), wave1, 2017 and Quarterly National Household Survey, special module on health, 2010).
As people age however, chronic conditions become more prevalent.
The number of people aged 50 years and over, living with one or more chronic disease, is estimated to increase by 40% from 2016 levels, to 1.09m in 2030 (based on analysis of TILDA data, 2018).
Multi-morbidity is common in older people with 45.3% of adults aged 65 years and over affected by arthritis, 44.4% by high blood pressure, 11.8% by diabetes and 3.7% by stroke (TILDA wave 3, 2014-2015).
Marginalised Groups
Ethnic and minority groups within our population include Travellers (30,987, CSO, 2016), asylum seekers (5,670 pending applications, Irish Refugee Council, 2017) and those who are homeless (6,194 adults and 3,559 children, Department of Housing Planning and Local Government, 2018).
Evidence indicates higher morbidity and mortality amongst these groups including poor mental health.
Lifestyle Risk Factors
Many diseases and premature deaths are preventable.
Increased morbidity and mortality are strongly related to lifestyle-based health determinants such as smoking, alcohol consumption, obesity and unhealthy eating, all of which have the potential to jeopardise many of the health gains achieved over the past decade.
The HSE is sustaining its focus on prevention and promotion through a wide variety of campaigns and interventions to address lifestyle risk factors.
These statistics and trends provide us with an understanding of the demographic change and the challenges we face which have implications for future planning and health service delivery.
Findings from a number of analyses and surveys, published in 2018 can be seen over the next few pages.
The aim of these is to support and inform future policy and planning in the health service.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Our Population
What the 2018 surveys told us
Healthy Ireland
Healthy Ireland Survey 2018, Summary of Findings was launched.
As part of the Healthy Ireland Framework, this is an annual face to face survey commissioned by the DoH and conducted by the Market Research Bureau of Ireland (MRBI).
The survey of over 7,500 people aged 15 and over living in Ireland, gives an up-to-date picture of the health of the nation and reports on many lifestyle behaviours.
Drinkers from more disadvantaged areas are more likely to binge drink (43%) than those from more affluent areas (33%).
Of the five unhealthy food types measured (sweets, cakes and biscuits, salted snacks, pastries and takeaways), 34% of people consume at least one of these daily and 91% consume at least one of these weekly.
17% smoke daily and 3% smoke occasionally.
85% perceive their health to be very good or good with 3% perceiving their health to be very bad or bad.
Source: Department of Health.
Healthy Ireland Survey 2018: Summary of Findings (prepared by Ipsos MRBI).
Harm from others’ drinking
The Untold Story: Harms experienced in the Irish population due to others’ drinking report was launched in 2018, setting out findings on the harms experienced as a result of other people’s drinking in the Republic of Ireland.
The report is based on findings from the first dedicated Irish survey on alcohol harm to others, known as AH20.
The report found that: •
One in six carers (16%) reported that children, for whom they had parental responsibility, experienced harm because of someone else’s drinking.
One in every two people (51%) reported experiencing harm due to strangers’ drinking in the past 12 months.
Three in every five people (61%) reported having a known heavy drinker in their life.
One in seven workers (14%) reported workrelated problems due to co-workers’ drinking.
The total estimated cost of AH20 as assessed in this survey was €862.75m.
Harms that are prominent throughout the report include: feeling unsafe, being harassed or insulted verbally, physical harassment, stress, having less money for household expenses, sleep disturbances, being a passenger with a drunk driver, ruined belongings and having to leave home for safety reasons.
The report also found that: women carry the burden of alcohol’s harm to others in the home; men carry the burden of alcohol’s harm to others in the workplace and younger adults are at greater risk of harm from others.
Health Service Executive.
Findings from these surveys are being incorporated into how we plan and deliver our services – further results of which can be seen throughout this Annual Report.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Our Population
The aim of the study was to better inform tobacco control policy and planning in Ireland to tackle smoking among children and young people through describing smoking behaviour, relationship with health, wellbeing and life experience and the impact of current control measures.
Findings are set out below.
Health and wellbeing of school children who smoke: •
Poorer self-reported health
Poorer self-reported happiness with life
More health complaints experienced with –
1 in 2 experiencing irritability/bad temper –
1 in 3 reporting difficulties in getting to sleep
1 in 3 reporting being depressed
More likely to dislike school
• More difficult relationships with teachers
• More difficult relationships with family and friends.
Access to cigarettes and packaging: •
Smokers find it easy to purchase cigarettes for themselves, or to get somebody to purchase cigarettes for them
Half of smokers have read warnings on cigarette packs
One in ten smokers reported not having a cigarette because of a warning, compared to one in two non-smokers.
Report prepared on behalf of Health and Wellbeing Tobacco Free Ireland Programme, Health Service Executive, 2018.
The aim of this study was to undertake an analysis of smoking patterns among adults in Ireland, and to document the effects of smoking on their health and wellbeing.
Findings are set out below.
Health and wellbeing profile of those who ever smoked: •
Poorer self-reported health, both physical and mental
Living with more smoking-related health conditions
More limited daily activities •
More likely to use health services.
Current smoking prevalence: •
Males 24%, Females 21%
There are 864,000 smokers in Ireland at the moment
• 1,050,000 ex-smokers in Ireland.
Report prepared on behalf of Health and Wellbeing Tobacco Free Ireland Programme, Health Service Executive, 2018.
Positive Ageing
Positive Ageing in Age Friendly Cities and Counties, Local Indicators for Ireland – Findings from the HaPAI survey was launched, presenting the findings from a random sample survey carried out with more than 10,000 older people on a county by county basis in 21 different local authority areas.
Key findings from the survey indicated that:
• 70% rated their health as good or very good, but only 32% were free of chronic conditions
18% of participants are smokers
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Listening to our Service Users
Listening to the views, concerns and experiences of patients is vital in ensuring we provide high quality care.
We continually engage with patients and service users to ensure their needs are at the centre of service delivery.
A number of areas were progressed during the year to promote patient and service user involvement across our health service.
Deirdre King De Montano, Business Manager, Clinical Director’s Office; Miriam McCarthy, PALS Manager; and Barbara Meaney, Staff Officer, Peri-operative Services encouraging all staff to check out the results of the National Patient Experience Survey. “
National Patient Experience Survey
All patients aged 16 and over, discharged in May, who spent 24 hours or more in one of the forty participating hospitals and had a postal address in the Republic of Ireland were asked during the year to complete the National Patient Experience Survey, a nationwide survey asking people for feedback about their stay in hospital.
The survey, which first launched in 2017, asked patients about their experiences of hospital care in order to find out what is working well in our health service, and what needs to be improved. “
Over 13,000 people participated, a strong response rate of over 50%.
Key findings included: •
84% of respondents said that they were always treated with respect and dignity while in hospital, with 16% reporting a fair to poor experience.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
97% of those who had important questions to ask said that nurses on the ward answered questions in a manner that they could understand.
82% had confidence and trust in the hospital staff that treated them.
Listening to our Service Users
National Patient Experience Survey 2018
Admission to hospital
The average patient rating for the admissions stage of care was 7.9 out of 10.
81% of respondents said that they were always treated with respect and dignity in the emergency department (ED).
31% of people said that they were admitted to a ward within the HSE’s target waiting time of six hours, with 3% saying that they waited 48 hours or more before being admitted to a ward.
The average patient rating for care on the ward was 8.3 out of 10.
27% of people said that the food they received in hospital was poor or fair.
96% of people said that the hospital room or ward that they were in was very clean or fairly clean.
The average rating for examinations, diagnosis and treatment was 8.2 out of 10.
40% of people said that they did not always have enough time to discuss their care and treatment with a doctor.
85% of people said that they were always given enough privacy when being examined or treated.
The average rating for discharge or transfer was 6.9 out of 10.
38% of people (3,442) said that they were not adequately informed about the side effects of medication to watch for when they went home.
71% of people (7,329) said that the purpose of medications they were to take at home was completely explained to them.
Discharge or Transfer
What we have done •
Quality improvements projects were put in place across all Hospital Groups with the aim of improving patient experience of ED services.
ED teams across all hospitals have reviewed patient suggestions for improvements to inform their quality improvement priorities at local level.
In addition to work being conducted by individual hospitals, support for Hospital Groups in improving quality in ED will be provided by Quality Improvement in collaboration with the Emergency Medicine Programme.
A thorough review of the survey’s 2018 findings on food related questions has been conducted by the Clinical Lead for Hospital Nutrition, who has also aided in the dissemination of results to catering managers nationally.
This feedback will be used to prioritise key areas for improvement at both a national and local hospital level, including the development of the National Food and Nutrition Policy.
A National Lead has been assigned by the Director of HR to develop a programme of support for staff to enhance clinical and ward round communication in acute hospital services.
This work was significantly advanced in 2018 with the introduction of the National Communications Programme, delivering a training programme to staff across acute hospital services.
The HSE has developed a roadmap in consultation with over 3,000 patients, service users and members of the public to provide the information they need to access and navigate the health service and manage and improve their own health and wellbeing.
2018 and 2019 will see an enhanced directory of services available on-line and a more patient-centred approach to how we communicate the health information our patients need on-line.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Listening to our Service Users
The attention of doctors and especially nursing staff was excellent.
In general, improvements were seen over the findings from the previous year’s survey reflecting the significant efforts made by acute hospitals to address the issues highlighted in 2017.
It is clear that most of the patients who completed the survey had positive experiences of acute healthcare; however, some did not.
By sharing these experiences, patients help identify the areas where improvements have been made and still are needed.
Emergency department was very busy – I had to sleep on a very uncomfortable bed in a very busy environment.
Listening, Responding and Improving – the HSE response to the findings of the National Patient Experience Survey details the actions in place to address patient concerns.
Response to the survey is being co-ordinated through a national oversight group, with local implementation of quality improvement initiatives led by personnel from hospitals and Hospital Groups.
Patient and Family Engagement
The National Patient Representative Panel has participated in a number of focus, steering and working groups, and has provided input into a wide range of programmes and projects.
Examples of this engagement include: •
Providing guidance and advice on the implementation of the Hello my Name is initiative in CHOs and hospitals and promoting the What Matters to You initiative as a way of providing care that is more compassionate and person-centred
Consultation on the development of a Patient Safety Strategy
Participation in the oversight group for the national acute floor implementation to ensure joined-up care on admission to ED
Consultation on the development of guidance for communication of critical laboratory results in the community
Recruitment of 18 patient representatives to sit on a number of national electronic health record (EHR) project groups
Participation in the HIQA eHealth Standards Advisory Group
Participation in the Cross-Border Healthcare Intervention Trials in Ireland Network
Membership of the HSE Drugs Committee
Participation in a focus group for MedLIS, the national medical laboratory information system
Participation in the working group for the HSE National Volunteer Policy
Consultation on the Review of Hospital Car Parking Charges to lay a foundation for establishing clear guidance and principles for hospitals
As well as the National Patient Experience Survey, findings from a number of additional surveys as outlined on pages 16-17 were examined during the year to see how they might inform improvements in our health service.
Such surveys included: • Healthy Ireland Survey 2018, Summary of Findings.
• Positive Ageing in Age Friendly Cities and Counties, Local Indicators for Ireland – Findings from the HaPAI survey.
Positive ageing in age friendly cities and counties: local indicators report: Department of Health, 2018.
Findings from these surveys are being incorporated into how we plan and deliver our services – further results of which can be seen throughout this Annual Report.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Listening to our Service Users
Consultation on proposed guidelines and allowances for post-mastectomy products, wigs and hairpieces for cancer patients
Membership on the judging panel for the National Health and Social Care Professions Innovation and Best Practice Awards 2018
Attendance at Public and Patient Involvement (PPI) Ignite at NUI Galway, focused on working with researchers to guide and influence research
Attendance at a joint facilitated workshop with HSE staff for the Future Leaders Programme.
Outside of the work of the National Patient Representative Panel, a number of other service user engagements took place including a public meeting for survivors of childhood cancer, organised by CanCare4Living and the Boyne Research Institute with support from the National Cancer Control Programme (NCCP).
The event was attended by survivors of childhood and adolescent cancer, their families and friends as well as health care professionals, researchers and advocacy groups, to share information and news of best practice in the care of childhood cancer survivors across Europe.
The NCCP are working on a range of projects to improve the experience and care for cancer survivors.
A workshop was also held to gather the views of stakeholders, including groups such as Pavee Point, Cuidiú and Cairde, on what the antenatal education standards should include to support improvements in the quality of antenatal education and the health and wellbeing of babies, pregnant women and their partners throughout the antenatal and postnatal periods.
Information on other service user engagement initiatives can be seen throughout the sections that follow including development of plans for effective participation in decisionmaking and for end-of-life care, mental health engagement, and events organised by service users.
Not enough staff to take the time to talk to the patients.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Listening to our Service Users
Patient representative
A prostate cancer survivor used personal experiences to help others and to shape the new National Cancer Control Programme (NCCP) Prostate Cancer GP Referral Guidelines.
Diagnosed in 2009, Tom Hope was given two options: surgery or active surveillance.
He chose the latter and after two clear biopsies Tom is now in good health.
Tom Hope at the launch of the
NCCP Prostate Cancer GP Referral
Guidelines. In 2016 he was invited as a patient representative to join the NCCP committee reviewing the Prostate Cancer GP Referral Guidelines.
This was an experience he valued, being given a chance to input the patient’s perspective of the test, receiving the results, reaction, anxiety and uncertainty.
After his experience of participating on this NCCP committee, he would encourage any cancer patient to participate on a committee as patient representative or in support groups where they can help others by sharing their treatment experience.
Office of the Confidential
Recipient The Office of the Confidential Recipient is a national service that receives concerns/complaints such as allegations of abuse, negligence, mistreatment or poor care practices in HSE or HSE funded residential care facilities in an independent capacity and, in good faith, from patients, service users, families, other concerned individuals and staff members.
It has dealt with almost 750 formal concerns/complaints from across the country since its establishment in December 2014.
In 2018, the total number of formal concerns/complaints received by the Confidential Recipient was 206, a slight increase on 2017.
The type of concerns raised include safeguarding, client placement/planning, access to equipment, level of staff to support client, financial charges, staff behaviour, and safety of care.
Further information and contact details for the Confidential Recipient can be found at www.hse.ie.
Communicating Clearly
Patients and service users ask us to be clear when we give them information about their health.
When we explain things clearly and with care and compassion, people have more confidence and trust in us and are more likely to take our advice, and follow medical guidance.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
In response to this, National Communications has produced a short leaflet to aid staff when speaking and writing to patients and services users.
A comprehensive set of guidelines for those producing letters, leaflets, websites, images for patients and services users has also been published, The guidelines contain a health literacy checklist which allows staff to evaluate if the message is clear and if it can be understood and acted on.
More written information could be given to discharged patients on their injury, treatment and aftercare.
Appeals Service
The National Appeals Service ensures that applicants for eligibility schemes (e.g. medical cards/GP visit cards, residential support services maintenance and accommodation contributions, Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS)) are given their correct entitlement, and also provides governance to the HSE in relation to the correct application of legislation, regulations and guidelines.
2,330 cases were processed, in 2018, of which 31% were allowed or partially allowed.
Listening to our Service Users
Communicating clearly
Michael Power, with the National
Adult Literacy Agency (NALA), helped National Communications update new plain English guidelines for all staff to ensure clear messaging.
For most of his life Michael hid the fact that he could barely read or write.
Whilst in his late 30s and after years of contemplation, he decided to return to school for a formal education and is now NALA student representative.
Michael, NALA Student Representative, speaking at the guidelines launch.
Health Service Executive (Excluding voluntary hospitals and agencies) The comments, compliments and complaints of service users allow our services to be continually improved.
In 2018, there were 6,268 compliments recorded.
However, many compliments go unrecorded and work is on-going to encourage all staff to record compliments as they provide information on the positive aspects of our service to assist in learning from what is working well.
There were 6,610 complaints recorded and examined by complaints officers under the Health Act 2004 and the Disability Act 2005.
Of the total number of complaints received, 3,695 or 56% were dealt with within 30 working days.
Complaints addressed by Complaints Officers are either formal complaints or unresolved complaints escalated from point-of-contact in a frontline service.
During 2018, there was an increased emphasis on supporting staff to resolve complaints at point-of-contact, including the introduction of an interactive on-line module to empower staff to respond to these.
A total of 2,847 staff completed this module in 2018.
* Some received 2017 but processed in 2018.
Listening to our Service Users
Complaint handling tool
The HSE’s National Complaints Governance and Learning Team has developed, in conjunction with the Office of the Ombudsman, an interactive on-line complaint handling e-learning tool, hosted through the HSELanD portal and consisting of two modules:
• Module one is designed to help HSE staff, as the first point of contact, to resolve complaints from service users, encompassing stage one of the Your Service Your Say policy.
• Module two is designed for Complaints Officers and goes through the entire process of handling a complaint at Stage 2 under the Your Service Your Say policy.
Table 3: HSE complaints received and % dealt with within 30 working days
Privacy
Communication and information
Safe and effective care
Dignity and respect
Improving health Accountability
Nursing homes/ residential care (aged 64 and under)
No. of complaints received No. and % dealt with within 30 working days
Clinical judgement
Children first
Voluntary hospitals and agencies
Nursing homes/ residential care for older people (65 and over)
Of the total number of complaints received, 9,029 or 79% were dealt with within 30 working days.
Safeguarding vulnerable persons (new category in 2016)
Data source: HSE Quality Assurance and Verification.
Note: Some complaints contain multiple issues and therefore fall under more than one category.
Complaints under Parts 2 and 3 of the Disability Act 2005 741 complaints were received under Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 in relation to a child’s assessment of need for disability services, a reduction of 0.4%.
Seven complaints were received under Part 3 of the Act, relating to access to buildings and services for people with disabilities.
Building a Better Health Service
Our aim is to be a world class health service available to people when and where they need it.
Laying the Foundations for Transformation
PHSI also provided support to allow key enablers for healthcare delivery to be progressed, including: •
Healthy Ireland and eHealth
Integrated models of patient care
Development of the new children’s hospital
Strategic programmes including quality and safety, and value improvement projects.
The Programme for Health Service Improvement (PHSI) continued to support transformation within the health service through a range of programmes, including development of a best practice management methodology.
Health service improvement
A key focus for the health service is to support better patient care and improve health outcomes by delivering effective, sustainable models of care that are integrated across service settings and in the person’s home and community.
Changes in our ways of working are designed to streamline performance and management across the CHOs, Hospital Groups and other services.
To enable this, the Strategy and Planning, Operations and Clinical functions of the HSE were established on 1st January, 2018.
These functions are engaging together in networked Commissioning Teams to plan health services and to solve complex challenges.
Commissioning Teams will work to strengthen relationships and collaboration between commissioners and service providers, moving clinical accountability closer to patients and building services around their needs.
This will provide greater equity and transparency, improving service delivery, influenced by collaboration between patients, services users and all stakeholders.
New ways of working
This will enable our healthcare system to provide patients and service users with care closer to home, to be more responsive to needs and to deliver better health outcomes with a strong focus on prevention and population health improvement.
A detailed action plan is in development, led by the Sláintecare Programme Office in the DoH, which will set out a series of work streams, designated actions and associated measures.
The HSE is committed to working with all stakeholders to ensure frontline delivery of the Sláintecare vision.
Implementation of Sláintecare
The Sláintecare Report (2017) and Sláintecare Implementation Strategy (2018) signal a new direction for the delivery of health and social care services in Ireland.
A whole of government vision for health, Sláintecare focuses on establishing programmes of work to move to a community-led model, providing local populations with access to a comprehensive range of non-acute services at every stage of their lives.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Building a Better Health Service
Values in Action
Values in Action is a structured culture development programme – using a social movement model – that aims to make the health service a better place to be for patients, service users and staff.
It is a long-term behaviour-based approach to creating a chosen culture in the health service and is based on nine visible behaviours centred on our core values of Care, Compassion, Trust and Learning.
The nine behaviours that reflect the three dimensions of our working lives (us as individuals, working with colleagues, and how we treat our patients and service users) are as follows: Personal • Am I putting myself in other people’s shoes? •
Keep people informed – explain the now and the next
Do an extra, kind thing colleagues in 2016 had little or no awareness of their stress and how it affected other people
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Building a Better Health Service
Values in Action is already showing very promising results, as can be seen on these pages, indicating that there is a substantial appetite among staff to support this movement throughout the health service.
To learn from what is changing in our culture, baseline surveys were carried out for each service area at the outset of implementing Values in Action, with changes tracked as the programme progressed.
We have discovered that, at the end of the first year of Values in Action, the prevalence of the nine behaviours increases by an average of approximately 10%.
By the end of the second year (as we are currently seeing in the Mid West), the behaviours begin to embed and become internalised as they start to become the norm for how things are done.
A baseline survey for Dublin North City and County Community Healthcare was carried out in May with comparative data due to be available summer 2019.
Find out more on www.hse.ie/valuesinaction or follow our progress on Twitter @HSEvalues
Transformation through our Workforce
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Building a Better Health Service
Developing leadership across the health service through the Leadership Academy, providing a consistent approach to programmes for staff as they progress in their careers.
The following initiatives were progressed in 2018 to improve patient flow and access to care: –
The Criteria Led Discharge (CLD) project commenced phase 1 of the pilot with the identification and approval of four implementation test sites.
The pilot will continue in 2019 and results will be used to measure the effectiveness of CLD.
The National Clinical Programme for Stroke continued to support sites delivering stroke specific rehabilitation services with a seventh site, Beaumont Hospital, added during the year.
Early Support Discharge (ESD) is the recognised model of care for patients, aiming to accelerate discharge home through the provision of stroke specific rehabilitation in the home setting.
In 2018, 366 patients were discharged to an ESD team, an increase to 142% since 2017 representing 20% of the total population of stroke patients discharged home from participating hospitals.
Further information in relation to the Health Services People Strategy 2015-2018 can be seen in the Enabling Healthcare Delivery section of this Annual Report.
Redesigning how Care is Delivered
The national clinical and integrated care programmes are working to redesign care from the traditional hospitalbased model to models of care delivered in the community.
Significant improvements can be achieved in the delivery of health and social care through this approach.
The Integrated Care Programme for Older Persons continued to support successful patient journeys for older people through an integrated care system, with 10 key essential steps that need to be in place to allow integrated care for older persons to be implemented, evaluated and sustained in a variety of locations.
Implementation of this 10-step framework was progressed in 13 sites nationally by the end of the year, including the development of redesigned care pathways and linkages in the areas of dementia, home care, falls and the single assessment tool (SAT).
(See next page for more information on the 10 step framework)
Timeliness for acute coronary syndrome treatment has significantly improved and a standard national delivery of treatment for patients has been developed.
A report, Heart Attack Care Ireland 2016, showed that treatment for heart attack patients in Ireland is on a par with, or above, international standards.
A number of initiatives were progressed through the national clinical programme for surgery:
A new national undergraduate curriculum for chronic disease prevention and management called Making Every Contact Count for Health Behaviour Change was launched in November, supported by the Integrated Care Programme for the Prevention and Management of Chronic Disease, aiming to bring a standardised approach to how healthcare professionals of the future are trained to support their patients to enjoy the best possible health.
(Further information on this can be seen in the Population Health and Wellbeing section of this Annual Report).
The Integrated Care Programme for Children progressed the implementation of phase 2 of the targeted hip ultrasound screening programme for infants at increased risk of developmental dysplasia of the hip.
Screening is available in 17 maternity units across the country.
A co-designed integrated care pathway for children with neuromuscular disorders has been developed, including an early detection algorithm, transition resource and a suite of informational supports for children, young adults and families.
The pilot of consultant delivered services in University Hospital Waterford continued, aiming to provide an increased presence of senior decision-makers and special interest clinics, to reduce length of stay and admissions, and improve EWTD compliance and satisfaction levels among patients, their families and staff.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Set up and accreditation of acute surgical assessment units (ASAUs) in four model 4 acute hospitals.
ED patient experience times were reduced by at least 50% in a pilot site, with patients being seen within 30 minutes of attending the ASAU.
A standardised See and Treat algorithm and a standardised pathway for minor procedures in outpatient departments were established.
The otolaryngology (ENT) Education in Primary Care initiative was awarded the Best Educational Project in primary care at the Irish Healthcare Awards.
As part of this initiative, 60 healthcare professionals were trained in the technique of ear suctioning to provide this service in the primary care setting.
Patients would previously have had to attend a hospital-based ENT surgeon for delivery of care.
The Theatre Quality Improvement Programme continued to deliver a systematic approach to process and pathway improvement.
Development of the Clinical Programme for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in Adults continued and the model of care is being considered by the College of Psychiatry of Ireland.
Detailed plans are underway and recruitment has commenced for three demonstration sites aligned with the draft model of care.
Building a Better Health Service
The National Clinical Programme for Older People designed the National Frailty Education Programme in partnership with TILDA.
Its purpose is to co-ordinate and develop an integrated plan for treatment and rehabilitation, support and long term follow up.
National quality improvement pilots were progressed by the Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disorder (COPD) Collaborative in South Tipperary General Hospital, and St. Vincent’s University Hospital, Dublin.
Early results included a reduction in admission rates and, where patients were admitted, an increase in respiratory reviews.
A Musculoskeletal (MSK) programme collaboration continued in 2018 between the National Clinical Programmes for Rheumatology and Trauma and Orthopaedics to address growing waiting lists, nationally, for both orthopaedic and rheumatology outpatient services.
A model of care for integrated MSK services between primary and secondary care is also in development.
An Asthma Education e-Learning Programme was developed by the National Clinical Programme for Asthma and the Asthma Society of Ireland and launched in November to provide the core knowledge needed by healthcare professionals to manage all aspects of asthma care in line with international best practice.
The National Clinical Programme for Palliative Care, in conjunction with the All Ireland Institute of Hospice and Palliative Care (AIIHPC), commenced the second phase of the pilot of the ECHO AIIHPC Nursing Home project.
The project is designed to support nursing home staff to improve their knowledge and skills in the care and management of patients with a wide range of palliative healthcare needs.
Models of care which have been completed include Specialist Geriatric Services Model of Care Part 2: mental health service provision; adult palliative care services; model of integrated care for patients with Type 2 diabetes; and the transition from paediatric to adult healthcare providers in rare diseases.
A number of clinical documents were also developed, including: –
Investigation and management of ovarian cysts in post-menopausal women
Management of breech presentation
Revised practice guide for the management of women with epilepsy
Swallow screening in stroke
Rapid discharge pathway for patients who wish to die at home
Care and management of a central venous access device for a child in the community.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Building a Better Health Service
Improving access and patient experience during the winter period
Winter is always a period of increased unscheduled care activity, however, winter 2017/2018 was a particularly challenging time for our health service.
An extreme weather event, Storm Emma, occurred in early 2018, and the severity of the storm and its effect on the healthcare system was profound.
The significant increase in unscheduled care admissions, which necessitated an extended recovery period to return to normal daily operations, impacted significantly on the capacity available to deliver scheduled care.
Seasonal influenza during winter 2017/2018 was at its highest level since the 2011/2012 season with peak influenza like illness rates exceeding 100 per 100,000 population (90 per 100,000 during 2016/2017).
Furthermore, there were 4,680 confirmed influenza hospitalisation cases notified during the 2017/2018 season compared to 1,425 in the previous year.
The Winter Plan 2017/2018 included a number of initiatives to support the health service during the busy winter period.
Key initiatives focused on providing additional acute hospital bed capacity, and measures to expedite patient discharges from acute hospital care, including: •
1,269 additional home care packages
128 additional acute beds were opened
3,526 patients were supplied with aids and appliances to facilitate their safe and timely discharge.
Key issues during the winter period include increased number of patient attendances at EDs, increased number of patients requiring hospital admission, infection outbreaks in the health service and wider community, heightened requirements for isolation due to infection prevention and control requirements, high hospital bed occupancy rates and increased numbers of patients in acute hospitals whose discharge is delayed.
The Winter Plan 2018/2019 focused on supporting services through the provision of: •
€10.6m for 550 additional home support packages
€4m for aids and appliances
€1.5m to support access to transitional care beds
66 additional community beds
4 additional rehabilitation beds
75 additional acute beds.
Additionally, a four week period of enhanced measures was put in place from 17th December 2018 to 13th January 2019, targeted at nine of the most challenged sites.
A Winter Action Team was established for each of the sites and additional funding was provided to support the sites during this focus period.
The enhanced measures included Frail Intervention Therapy Teams (FITT) to support frail elderly patients, extended availability of diagnostics, extended opening hours of acute medical assessment units and additional senior decision makers on site.
Other initiatives included:
Arrangements with private providers in terms of access to diagnostics and inpatient beds
Curtailment of elective and outpatient care, routine community activity and scheduled diagnostics
Scheduling of additional emergency theatre lists
Optimal usage of Clinical Hub and Hear and Treat by NAS
Optimal usage of day hospitals
Optimised public health nurse (PHN) and HSCP engagement to maintain patients in the community and/or facilitate early discharge
Public campaigns including Winter Wellness, Flu Vaccine and Under the Weather
Promotion of injury units as an alternative to attendance at ED.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Building a Better Health Service
Improving Performance, Efficiencies and Effectiveness
The Performance and Accountability Framework lays out how performance will be managed across the areas of: •
Access to and integration of services
Quality and safety of those services
Finance, governance and compliance requirements
The Workforce.
The emphasis within the framework is on recognising good performance and on improving performance at all levels of the health service, while setting out how CHOs, Hospital Groups, the National Ambulance Service (NAS), the Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS), heads of other national services and individual managers are held to account.
The framework was revised in 2018 to take account of new governance arrangements and organisational changes.
The role and membership of the National Performance Oversight Group, which has authority for performance and accountability oversight, was also revised in line with the new governance arrangements, and accountability and responsibility for performance was embedded further within the service delivery system.
A Performance Management Unit (PMU) is being developed to support improvement activities across the health service where there are significant performance challenges.
The PMU is an additional resource to support the performance escalation process in the Performance and Accountability Framework.
Research and Development
Health research, innovation and evidence are key enablers of healthcare systems, and a growing body of evidence indicates that healthcare organisations with a strong research culture deliver better care.
In 2018, the Research and Development function was established in the HSE to foster a research culture in the health service, increase the integration of research into health service delivery, improve research governance and contribute to the development of our research capacity.
strategic action plan for research as well as on-going work towards the development of a research governance framework required to safeguard public confidence, ensure good use of resources and encourage public and patient participation in research.
Enhancing EU and North-South
Co-operation There are many health services for which it is sensible to develop an all-island approach or where provision needs to be made for patients to move across the border to receive a service.
Examples of this North-South co-operation include the all-island paediatric congenital heart disease network, the North West Cancer Centre and the primary percutaneous coronary intervention service provided in Altnagelvin.
The HSE also partners (including as lead partner) on a number of EU funded programmes in the areas of acute services, mental health, population health, children’s services, primary care and older persons’ services.
These projects are financed by the European Regional Development Fund and are designed to support strategic cross-border co-operation in order to help overcome issues that arise from the existence of a border.
Preparing for Brexit
Given the potential impact of Brexit, the HSE has established a Steering Group to prepare for the UK’s withdrawal from the EU and is working closely with the DoH and other relevant stakeholders to mitigate any negative impact of Brexit on our population’s health. A project team is also in place to review and coordinate preparations and contingency planning.
During the year, this function carried out the first ever research benchmark exercise within the organisation.
It showed that significant levels of research activity currently take place in the health service, in addition to that performed in collaboration with our academic partners. A parallel assessment was also undertaken to determine the current status of research governance and support structures, and a significant number of gaps were identified. This has informed the development of a HSE
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Quality and Safety
Our focus is on the quality of services we deliver and the safety of those who use them.
Continual improvement in the quality of care, learning from patient experience, and systems to maintain standards and minimise risk are essential in ensuring safer healthcare.
The National Patient Safety Programme
Healthcare associated infections (HCAI) are infections which can occur in hospital or community settings when attending for treatment, and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is the issue of bacteria that are no longer easy to kill with antibiotics.
CPE (Carbapenemase Producing Enterobacterales) is one of the newer AMR bacteria.
It was declared a national public health emergency in 2017.
An Oversight Group and Implementation Team are in place to support staff to improve patient safety by controlling HCAI and AMR.
One of the important steps in control of CPE is identifying people who are CPE carriers.
At the Health Service Excellence Awards the national sepsis programme won the Excellence in Quality Care award.
The number of sepsis associated hospital deaths has fallen by more than 20% over the past four years.
Sepsis is a potentially life-threatening condition that can affect a person of any age, irrespective of underlying good health or medical conditions.
Sepsis recognition improved by 67% between 2015 and 2016 and by a further 15% by 2017; this improved recognition led to earlier treatment with the appropriate treatment bundle.
A national hospital-wide sepsis awareness and education initiative is on-going and, to assist in raising wider awareness, the Community Sepsis Awareness Campaign was launched during the year at the National Ploughing Championships.
Phase 3 of the Pressure Ulcers To Zero collaborative was completed in 2018, focusing on acute services, with 23 multi-disciplinary teams participating from acute hospitals in the South/South West and Dublin Midlands Hospital Groups.
A 67.2% reduction in newly acquired pressure ulcers was achieved during the 12 months to the end of this phase.
Preparation and planning for a Reducing Falls and Improving Bone Health Awareness programme commenced with high level engagement with relevant stakeholders, in preparation for roll-out in 2019.
Quality improvement initiatives, targeting medication management associated with blood clots, included:
Work is underway to expand this project to a wider area as well as looking at other ways to improve prescribing. Knowledge and awareness of AMR and infection prevention control improved through campaigns such as Under the Weather, European Antibiotic Awareness, Hand Hygiene Week, International Infection Prevention Control Week and the Winter Campaign.
Also, a new web-based resource was developed to help staff working in all areas of the health service, providing: –
Guidelines and information for hospitals, community services, GPs and public health nurses
Updated on-line antibiotic prescribing guidelines for GPs and dentists (www.antibioticprescribing.ie)
New hand hygiene training programme for community services staff
Information for patients.
A national project to train more people as Hand Hygiene Trainers resulted in 40 sessions being organised to train trainers in the community.
Those trainers gave 541 local training sessions, reaching 4,200 staff in community services.
A project in collaboration with 200 GPs in the Southdoc GP Out of Hours service aimed to reduce the percentage of those antibiotics prescribed that should be avoided in primary care, as a percentage of total antibiotics prescribed, from 45% pre-intervention to 22.5% by end June 2018.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Educational materials were produced for patients to facilitate better recognition of signs and symptoms of blood clots
Healthcare-associated venous thromboembolism (VTE) key performance indicators were developed –
Quality and Safety
Lorraine Murphy facilitating a pressure ulcer prevention workshop as part of a HSE collaboration with the Ministry of Health in Maputo, Mozambique.
Global Health Programme
The drive for improved quality and safety extends as far as Africa (Mozambique, Sudan and Ethiopia) with collaborative partnership agreements in place via the Global Health Programme to improve quality of care in health systems in developing countries.
The programme also delivers technical assistance to Irish Aid for Global Product Development Partnerships.
Medication safety improvements were also progressed in a number of other areas, including: –
Medication management in disability services
Psychotropic medication in people with dementia
Minimising risk with valproate in women and girls.
The National Early Warning Systems (NEWS), including the Paediatric Early Warning System (PEWS), Irish Maternity Early Warning System (IMEWS) and Emergency Medicine Early Warning System (EMEWS) are key patient safety systems used in acute hospitals to aid timely recognition of and response to a deteriorating patient.
The Deteriorating Patient Recognition and Response Improvement Programme completed a NEWS Audit of nine acute hospital sites, and new KPIs with multiple indicators for NEWS and IMEWS were rolled out for acute hospitals.
The Decontamination Safety Programme published two documents to support safe decontamination practice.
The Foundation Programme for Quality Improvement in Decontamination Practice has engaged with 12 acute hospital decontamination teams and one primary care dental team realising significant cost savings and improvements in service delivery. Two academically accredited minor award
programmes have been developed in collaboration with the Institute of Technology Tallaght which has led to over 150 decontamination practitioners participating in these education programmes in 2018.
Service User Involvement and Experience •
• An initiative, Patient Safety Stories, has been launched as part of the further development of a person-centred approach to incident management.
Taken collectively, these stories help us build a picture of how incidents can impact on people affected and will be used in training and education sessions to improve our understanding of and response to incidents.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Quality and Safety
Publication of the Office of the Ombudsman’s Learning to Get Better progress report showed that 27 of the 33 recommendations that specifically related to the HSE were implemented fully or were underway.
Your Voice Matters is a tool designed to capture patient experiences as part of the Patient Narrative Project, which aims to position the patient or service user centrally in the design and delivery of healthcare.
Phase 3 of the project is now on-going with feedback gathered being used to support the implementation of local service improvement initiatives.
106 participants graduated from the Royal College of Physicians Ireland (RCPI) having completed the Diploma in Leadership and Quality in Healthcare which teaches senior healthcare professionals and managers how to formulate and lead quality improvement initiatives in the workplace, translating theory and methodology into measurable outcomes such as quicker access to care and fewer adverse events. HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
The first formal education programme in Ireland for Clinical Directors and consultants aspiring to undertake leadership roles in healthcare commenced in March.
This was provided by the Institute of Leadership, Royal College of Surgeons Ireland (RCSI) with 33 participants in the first cohort (March) and 32 participants in the second cohort (November).
The person-centred culture national facilitator development programme has been completed by 18 hospitals (11 programmes in 2017 and seven programmes in 2018) with a total of 60 facilitators trained.
This training will enable teams to translate their shared values and beliefs about person-centred practice into how they plan and provide care that can deliver measurable culture improvement.
A practical toolkit Leadership Skills for Engaging Staff in Improving Quality was published in collaboration with the National Staff Engagement Forum, to support leaders to create workplaces which value staff.
Cork University Maternity Hospital trained staff engagement facilitators who lead quality improvement initiatives.
Microsystems training and coaching was provided to seven frontline ED teams in the Dublin Midlands Hospital Group.
Implementation support was provided to 20 frontline teams to roll out Schwartz Rounds, which are facilitated conversations with staff about the emotional impact of their work.
They improve staff wellbeing (reducing psychological distress) and teamwork which ultimately has a positive impact on person-centred care.
Over 70 staff engagement sessions, events and conferences were provided to staff in frontline services.
Over 780 staff were trained in clinical audit in hospitals and community settings.
A suite of on-line measurement and audit resources were also developed which are available on the HSE website.
A project was completed at Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street) to enhance its board’s understanding and assurance of clinical care indicators. Quality and Safety
Development of a number of National Clinical Effectiveness Committee (NCEC) guidelines was progressed including: –
Maternity, including risk in pregnancy
Sepsis management
COPD, including guidance on the provision of rehabilitation and outreach services
Diagnosis, staging and treatment of patients with colon, rectal, pancreatic and oesophageal cancers
Diagnosis and treatment of tobacco addiction
Intraoperative haemorrhage.
The Incident Management Framework 2018 was launched, designed to provide health and social care services with a practical and proportionate approach to the management of incidents, placing a particular emphasis on supporting the needs of service users, families and staff in the aftermath of an incident.
45 healthcare audits were completed across five themes relating to healthcare records management, NEWS, clinical hand-over, the national counselling service and safety incident management/serious reportable events.
26 audits across four themes were commenced on work related violence and aggression, home births, CPE in long term care facilities and the school immunisation programme.
A Quality Improvement Project commenced with HSE Directorate members to enhance their understanding of quality of care information and to support them in their Directorate role in leading the organisation in improving quality.
This includes a monthly review and discussion on key clinical care information in addition to qualitative information on patient and staff experience.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Safeguarding and Protection
Awareness campaign
The key message at the launch of the 2018 Safeguarding Ireland public awareness campaign was to encourage people to safeguard their future by planning ahead, putting in place an Enduring Power of Attorney to give financial and legal decision-making responsibility to a chosen and trusted person.
Other important decisions to be considered include notifying of future healthcare preferences and advance healthcare directives.
The HSE is committed to ensuring that all adults within its care, regardless of the setting in which they live, are treated with respect and dignity in a supportive environment where their welfare is promoted.
All vulnerable people have a right to be protected against abuse and to have any concerns regarding abusive experiences addressed.
Through the nine Safeguarding and Protection Teams in each of the CHOs all safeguarding concerns are treated in confidence and, as much as possible, are handled in a way that respects the wishes of the person at risk.
Over 10,000 safeguarding concerns were raised
The National Safeguarding Office Report 2017 was launched which indicates that: –
There has been a 28% overall increase in concerns being raised to the HSE
Physical abuse remains the most significant category of alleged abuse for those aged under 65 (46%, compared to 47% in 2016)
For those aged over 65 years, the most significant category of alleged abuse is psychological abuse (31%) and financial abuse (22%)
Financial abuse and neglect increase with age with the highest level of reporting in those aged over 80 years.
A review of Safeguarding Vulnerable Persons at Risk of Abuse – National Policy and Procedures 2014, which commenced in 2017, was progressed and is due for finalisation in early 2019.
The provision of training is integral to the roll-out of the HSE safeguarding policy and this is implemented through two main training programmes which are designated officer training and the safeguarding vulnerable persons’ awareness programme.
Indicative figures for 2018 show that: –
Over 1,500 people undertook designated officer training
Over 16,000 people undertook safeguarding vulnerable persons’ awareness training.
Further details on the HSE safeguarding service including reports are on www.hse.ie/safeguarding
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Safeguarding and Protection
Children First
Protected Disclosure
Children First applies to everyone
The HSE operates under two sets of legislation which govern protected disclosures in the health sector, the Health Act 2004 (as amended in 2007) and the Protected Disclosures Act 2014.
To ensure the safeguarding of children: •
The HSE (Corporate) Child Safeguarding Statement (CSS) was developed, setting out how the health service protects children and young people.
Publication of a CSS is a new requirement for organisations working with children and families and, due to the complexities of the health service with many services under its remit, a CSS is being developed at each CHO and Hospital Group level and, where necessary, subsidiary CSSs at individual relevant service levels are being adopted to include any further relevant risks and procedures applicable.
Procedures for the Protected
Disclosures Act 2014 were adopted by the Leadership Team in 2018.
The Protected Disclosures Unit continues to process disclosures received as well as providing support and guidance to disclosers and managers, and information sessions on protected disclosures across the HSE. •
48 protected disclosures were received in 2018.
National Independent Review Panel
The National Independent Review Panel (NIRP) continues to provide the HSE with a means to independently review circumstances involving individuals with a disability in receipt of, or known to, HSE or HSE funded services.
In 2018, five independent panel members and a service manager were appointed in addition to the existing independent chairperson of the NIRP.
Operational guidelines were developed which set out the purpose and principles of the NIRP and provide clear guidance on the process that will be followed for all reviews.
Assisted Decision Making
In order to support the roll-out of Assisted Decision Making, a national training and education plan was developed and 76 information and briefing sessions were delivered to 3,009 people on the implications of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) 2015 Act in acute, community and voluntary services.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Safeguarding and Protection
Open Disclosure
It is the policy of the HSE that service users who experience harm as a result of their health care are communicated with in an open, honest, empathic and timely manner.
Open disclosure involves an acknowledgement to the service user that an incident has occurred, providing a sincere and meaningful apology/expression of regret, keeping the service user informed and providing feedback on reviews and on the steps taken to prevent a recurrence of the incident.
A number of initiatives have been progressed to support the implementation of the HSE open disclosure policy and programme: •
The open disclosure policy and programme is co-ordinated via the recently established National Open Disclosure Office which also provides strategic guidance on the implementation of:
(i) The HSE Open Disclosure Policy and accompanying guidelines (ii) Part 4 of the Civil Liability (Amendment) Act 2017 and the regulations accompanying Part 4 of this Act.
(iii) The open disclosure national training programme
Over 31,500 staff members have completed staff training on the open disclosure policy, 362 staff have completed the Train the Trainer course and work has commenced with HSELanD on the development of three e-learning modules.
Work has also commenced on the development of a communication and open disclosure programme for medical staff, and training has been provided to open disclosure trainers and leads on the Civil Liability Amendment Act 2017.
The HSE policy on open disclosure has been revised in response to the implementation of the relevant recommendations from the Scoping Inquiry into the CervicalCheck Screening Programme, 2018, the commencement of Part 4 of the Civil Liability Amendment Act 2017 and the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) Act 2015.
It is planned to launch the revised open disclosure policy in April 2019.
A compliance self-assessment tool will be developed to support the roll-out of this policy.
The HSE National Open Disclosure Steering Committee is currently being established to strengthen corporate oversight, strategic leadership and accountability with the on-going implementation of the national open disclosure programme and policy.
Work has commenced on the collection of open disclosure data on the National Incident Management System (NIMS).
Work continues with multiple stakeholders across the health and social care system, professional and regulatory bodies, indemnifying bodies and royal colleges to support the implementation of the HSE open disclosure policy and programme e.g.
GPs, pharmacists, and CPE expert group.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Excellence in Delivering our Health Services
The award ceremony for the annual Health Service Excellence Awards, held at Farmleigh in December provided a platform to celebrate the success, commitment and dedication of staff and to promote learning for the benefit of others while empowering staff to take pride in the services they provide.
332 projects from all over the country entered into the 2018 awards, highlighting the enthusiasm of staff for new ways of working that can lead to real improvement for patients, service users and their families.
Following a rigorous selection process, six innovative projects made it through to the final shortlist.
These projects highlight how so many staff are working to deliver better services with easier access and higher quality of care for patients.
Health Service Excellence Awards 2018
The projects of the finalists Award
Winner Innovation in Services Delivery
The National Verotoxigenic E.
Coli Reference Laboratory (VTEC NRL) – Public Health Laboratory, Cherry Orchard Hospital
Championing Mental Health across our Health Services
Primary Care Psychology Service – Access to Psychology Services Ireland (APSI), Roscommon
Improving the Patient Experience
Frail Older People, Rapid Improvement Programme – Regional Hospital Mullingar, Co. Westmeath
Excellence in Quality Care
The National Sepsis Programme
Improving our Children’s Health
Public Health Nurse Oral Healthy Intervention Initiative – Waterford Community Services
Supporting a Healthy Community
Inclusion Health – A Primary Care Team with a difference – St. James’s Hospital, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital and mental health teams in conjunction with homeless charities and Safetynet Primary Care medical charity
Details of these winning projects can be seen throughout various sections of this Annual Report.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Excellence in Delivering our Health Services
In addition to the final six projects, the following three awards were also presented.
Attendees at one of the training events held during the Gathering.
Special Recognition Award Kieran Henry (The Gathering)
This award was presented to Kieran Henry, Advanced Paramedic, Emergency Medical Services, in recognition of his role in organising The Gathering, an annual event for those working in the frontline of emergency services.
The event which attracts emergency personnel from home and abroad allows ambulance, hospital, defence and policing services to join forces and train together, sharing their experiences, practising lifesaving skills and rehearsing how to deal with challenging scenarios.
A diverse range of training events were held during the course of The Gathering in 2018, including a simulation of an aircraft disaster.
Outstanding Employee Award
This award allows colleagues to recognise the broader personal achievements and contributions of individual staff members that set them apart from any particular project.
It recognises and celebrates the impact and effect that person has in terms of their personal commitment to health service delivery and the effect they have in their work community.
Twelve employees were nominated for this award, which was awarded to the late Tony Leahy who passed away in November.
Tony was a General Manager who played an important leadership role in realising many of the innovations in mental health and reform in recent years.
His vision was based on making lives better for all those who used services, their supporters and those who provided services.
Tony understood that unless we were inclusive of all voices in the planning of our services that change could not happen.
He was one of the first to invite those with lived experience and their families and supporters to sit at the national table with those who provide and plan for mental health services.
He championed the recovery approach and worked tirelessly to help build a modern mental health service which has led to the establishment of the office for Mental Health Engagement and inclusion of peer support workers supporting recovery on the mental health teams.
All of this work has culminated in the co-producing of the National Framework for Recovery in Mental Health 2018-2020, Tony’s ultimate legacy to ensure a consistent evidence-based approach to embedding recovery oriented practice in services.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Excellence in Delivering our Health Services
Rose being assessed through FIT by Noeleen.
Popular Choice Award
Frail Older People Rapid Improvement Programme
The Regional Hospital Mullingar introduced a Frailty Intervention Team (FIT) for patients over 75 years attending their ED.
By introducing FIT, a whole system pathway for frail older people is now in place, starting at the front door to ED, ensuring their needs are managed assertively and their length of stay in hospital is kept to a minimum.
When patients present at triage, they are screened for frailty and a comprehensive geriatric assessment is undertaken.
At that point, choice of care is also discussed enabling people to identify their preferences quite early on in their journey of care.
Appropriate priority referrals are then made to the health and social care professions within the community or hospital, as required.
The many benefits of introducing this programme include: •
Seamless transition for frail older people moving between acute and community services
Length of stay in hospital reduced
Number of discharges increased in the first seven days
Number of discharges home increased, thus reducing the requirement for convalescence by half
Hospital and community staff working together to provide the best service for frail older adults
Positive experience by service users, family members and carers noticing that their family member’s condition has improved more rapidly both psychologically and physically
Identification of other symptoms such as dysphagia and malnutrition with a broadened selection of foods made available to enable this to be addressed
Development of frailty education and training booklet for all staff to further support the care provided to older frail people.
Population Health and Wellbeing
Population health and wellbeing is about helping our whole population to stay healthy and well by focusing on prevention, protection, and health promotion and improvement.
Feel good together…
The Healthy Ireland summer campaign encouraged people to get out and get active together, to make positive lifestyle choices to improve their physical and mental health.
The campaign theme Feel Good Together is built around the three themes of eat well, think well and be well.
The campaign, which was advertised across radio, digital social and print media provides links to support and information to help people make those healthier choices.
Pictured above at the launch of the campaign: An Taoiseach, Leo Varadkar TD, Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD and Minister of State for Health Promotion and the National Drugs Strategy, Catherine Byrne TD.
As part of the healthcare reform programme, Healthy Ireland: A Framework for Improved Health and Wellbeing 20132025 aims to create a society where health and wellbeing is valued and supported at every level of society.
Healthy Ireland Survey 2018, Summary of Findings was launched and some key survey findings can be seen on page 16 of this report.
Promoting positive mental health
– A number of initiatives were rolled out including training 312 teachers to support the mental health of primary school children through the Zippy’s Friends programme. Implementing Healthy Ireland Framework
The MindOut programme was launched to support the social and emotional wellbeing of young people aged 15 to 18 years.
18 training days were delivered, reaching 267 post primary school teachers and Youthreach centre teachers across the country.
The Minding Your Wellbeing programme was delivered to over 900 staff.
The National Men’s Health Action Plan Healthy Ireland – Men HI-M 2017-2021 continued to be implemented, including the delivery of Men’s Health Week in June and Men’s Health Engage training programme to 612 participants. •
• Healthy Ireland Implementation Plans were launched for seven out of nine CHOs and more on these can be seen in the CHO section of this Annual Report.
Development and completion of plans for the remaining CHOs are well underway.
Implementation of Healthy Ireland plans continued in Saolta University Health Care Group, UL Hospitals Group, RCSI, Dublin Midlands and Ireland East Hospital Groups.
Planning commenced with South/South West Hospital Group for the development of their plan.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
A range of Healthy Ireland initiatives can be seen throughout this Annual Report.
Population Health and Wellbeing
Improving the health and wellbeing of the population •
Making Every Contact Count (MECC) – A new third level curriculum called Making Every Contact Count for Health Behaviour Change was officially launched.
This is a collaboration between the HSE and Higher Education Institutions to prepare newly qualified health professionals with the skills needed to engage with patients and encourage them to make healthier choices and reduce their risk of chronic disease.
– The MECC on-line training programme went live and provides the knowledge and skills required to undertake a brief intervention in the main lifestyle risk factors for chronic disease, which are tobacco, unhealthy eating, inactivity, alcohol and drugs.
Three train the trainer programmes were completed to train Health Promotion and Improvement staff to deliver the skills workshop and face to face element of the training programme.
All nine self-management support co-ordinators are now in position within the CHOs to promote and co-ordinate services, increasing patients’ skills and confidence in managing their own health conditions.
A tribute to Gerry and family
• Since the summer of 2013 Gerry and his family have inspired over 1.3 million people to quit smoking.
Gerry, who shared an insight into his family life and how they coped with his diagnosis of tobacco-related throat cancer in the QUIT campaign’s films and TV adverts, had an extraordinary impact on people to quit smoking.
Gerry wanted to share his story to help people avoid the illness and premature separation from loved ones.
• The remarkable impact of this campaign was marked by the release of a new video to show gratitude to Gerry and his family who together have changed many lives for the better.
In conjunction with this, Gerry’s daughter Lisa published a memoir about the campaign called The Man who Moved the Nation.
Healthy Eating and Active Living Programme –
Let’s Get Active booklet was published to support staff in promoting awareness of the benefits of physical activity as a powerful therapeutic tool for people with mental health difficulties.
6,524 staff across all CHOs and Hospital Groups participated in the national Steps to Health challenge in May, supported by 469 team co-ordinators.
On average, there was a 70% increase in activity levels recorded between week one and week five of the challenge.
Move for Life, a research project funded by the Healthy and Positive Ageing Initiative (HaPAI) was launched.
The purpose of the project is to carry out an evaluation of peer mentoring intervention, designed to broaden and increase access to existing Move for Life programmes, to help those aged over 50 years that are inactive to become more active.
As part of developing the Healthy Weight for Children Framework and in partnership with Safefood, the START campaign, START your child on a healthy lifestyle booklet was published.
In excess of 4,000 visits were made to www.makeastart.ie and four community activity programmes were delivered in collaboration with section 39 funded partners, including Parkrun and Community Games.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Population Health and Wellbeing
Alcohol Programme –
Based on findings from the first Irish survey on alcohol harm to others (AH20), the HSE published a report The Untold Story: Harms experienced in the Irish population due to others drinking that quantifies some of alcohol’s harm to others in Ireland.
Some key survey findings can be seen on page 16 of this report.
Alcohol and Drugs: A Parent’s Guide was launched and is filled with information and practical advice for parents on how to talk to their teenagers about alcohol and other drugs.
• In December, the Public Health (Alcohol) Act was signed into law.
This was a significant milestone for the www.askaboutalcohol.ie campaign and marked the achievement of one of the core objectives of the campaign.
Sexual health and wellbeing –
As part of the implementation of the National Sexual Health Strategy 2015-2020 and the strengthening of parents’ role in sexual education Talking to Your Young Child about Relationships, Sexuality and Growing Up was launched.
This resource will support parents to talk to their younger children about relationships and sexuality in a gradual, age appropriate way.
The foundation programme in sexual health promotion, which is a comprehensive capacity building training programme for service providers who want to develop their confidence, skills and knowledge in the areas of sexual health promotion, was delivered across a number of CHOs.
The 16th annual all-Ireland gay health forum was launched in partnership with Gay Health Network and with support from the DoH.
The aim is to present an opportunity for those involved in the areas of HIV, sexual health and other health related issues for men who have sex with men (MSM) to network and share knowledge.
The new sexual wellbeing campaign #RespectProtect was launched and more on this can be seen on page 49.
To support this campaign www.sexualwellbeing.ie was also launched to provide information on many aspects of sexual health including consent, relationships, contraception, sexually transmitted infections and crisis pregnancy.
Tobacco Free Ireland –
It describes the scope and impact of tobacco control activities undertaken by the HSE over the past number of years which have contributed to the reduction in the number of people smoking in Ireland today.
Two secondary analysis reports Adult Smoking in Ireland and Youth Smoking in Ireland were also launched and findings from these reports can be seen on page 17 of this Annual Report.
In collaboration with Tobacco Free Ireland partners, a conference was held to mark World No Tobacco Day with the aim of supporting communities to take action to achieve the Tobacco Free Ireland 2025 goal of less than 5% smoking prevalence in Ireland.
Research published at the conference indicated that those most vulnerable in our communities are most at risk of death and long-term smoking-related illnesses.
Implementation of the national tobacco free campus policy progressed across all CHO and Hospital Group sites.
QuitManager is a comprehensive smoking cessation patient management system and will facilitate electronic referral to the HSE’s QUIT service and detailed feedback reporting.
Following input from key stakeholders, including extensive user acceptance testing and training of a group of ‘super users’, the QuitManager system was adapted and designed to meet the needs of smoking cessation services and QUITline.
In November, QuitManager went live for the national QUITline and in a number of community and hospital services with further roll-out due in 2019.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Nurture Programme –
Accidental injuries in children aged up to five years of age are a leading cause of harm and death among children in Ireland.
To combat this, the original Child Safety Awareness Programme has been updated to address new child safety risks and includes an e-learning module, available through www.hseland.ie together with updated child safety resources for public health nurses, parents and carers.
Dementia – Understand Together –
The success of the Dementia Understand Together campaign, co-created with people with dementia and their carers has resulted in increased levels of understanding of dementia and almost six in ten people have reported taking some action as a result of the campaign.
5,610 people received advice and support via the free Helpline service, an increase of 13% since the campaign launched in 2016.
Over 190 people across Ireland have volunteered to become Dementia Understand Together Community Champions.
Population Health and Wellbeing
As part of the National Healthy
Childhood Programme, a new pregnancy and child health website www.mychild.ie was launched.
It is designed to be a one stop shop for parents and parents-to-be where they can access trusted information and advice on pregnancy that will influence their child’s health and wellbeing through their first three years.
The books
At the launch, Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD, reads the new My Child: 0 to 2 years book for parents with Sadie Sheridan, Elena Holly McGrath and Cormac O’Brien.
Protecting the population from threats to their health and wellbeing •
Control of healthcare associated infections (HCAI) and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is the responsibility of everyone who works in or accesses our health services.
A number of initiatives are underway throughout the health service and further information on these can be seen in the Quality and Safety section of this Annual Report.
Protecting the population from the spread of communicable diseases is an important priority for us.
Timely and effective responses were provided to 727 notifiable infectious disease outbreaks and 4,144 individual outbreak associated infectious disease cases around the country.
Immunisation –
The influenza campaign #YourBestShot was launched in October with a strong emphasis again on increasing uptake rates among healthcare workers.
The impact of this campaign, which included a peer vaccination programme, has resulted in increased uptake of the vaccine among healthcare workers in acute hospitals and long term care facilities.
In acute hospitals, uptake increased to 44.8% in 2017/2018 compared to 34% in 2016/2017.
In long term care facilities, uptake increased to 33.1% in 2017/2018, compared to 27.1% in 2016/2017.
Rotavirus and meningococcal B vaccines have been implemented as part of the national primary childhood immunisation schedule and the uptake of these vaccines are in line with uptake for other vaccines in the schedule.
A social media and digital print communications campaign took place to highlight the importance of getting the pertussis (or whooping cough) vaccine during pregnancy, including through publication of My Pregnancy and information on the new www.mychild.ie website.
From November each pregnant woman is entitled to receive the pertussis vaccination free of charge during pregnancy.
The HPV vaccine information campaign was launched in March to support parents in making an informed decision in ensuring their daughters get the vaccine and get protected from cervical cancer.
The uptake rate for HPV vaccine has increased significantly (uptake rate for two doses of the vaccine for the 2017/2018 academic year is at 59.4%, up from 49.4% in the 2016/2017 academic year).
As part of the National Newborn Bloodspot Screening Programme, screening commenced in December for two new metabolic conditions (Medium Chain AcylCoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency and Glutaridc Aciduria Type 1 (GA1).
These are rare but treatable inherited conditions and, with screening, newborns can be diagnosed and treated early to prevent serious and potentially life threatening complications.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Population Health and Wellbeing
Environmental Health Service •
In general, compliance with the Public Health (Tobacco) Act 2002 was high.
However, there were 27 prosecution cases in 2018 which resulted in convictions for tobacco related offences.
The Food Safety Authority of Ireland Service Contract 2016-2018 was implemented and all aspects of the service contract were complied with.
The Public Health (Sunbeds) Act 2014 is designed to protect young people and promote a more informed choice amongst adults in relation to the use of sunbeds.
Year four of the Public Health Sunbeds Inspection Programme involved the undertaking of a number of inspections, test purchases and mystery shopper inspections.
Work continued to identify and agree a sustainable funding model to ensure compliance with fluoridation requirements in public water supplies.
As part of 2018 food import activities, 3,020 consignments of food were assessed with 7,048 routine checks and 583 additional control checks undertaken.
Engagement on the implications of the Public Health (Alcohol) Act 2018 is on-going with the DoH.
National Screening Service •
• Uptake remained high with a greater number of women attending for mammography screening than was targeted.
370,000 smear tests in all settings were carried out in 2018 compared to 280,000 in 2017.
It should be noted that for performance purposes, CervicalCheck reports only those tests carried out in a primary care setting and these equated to 340,000 in 2018 compared to 260,000 in 2017.
The additional demand for tests in 2018 created a backlog of women waiting for results with some waiting up to 27 weeks.
Sourcing additional capacity to clear the backlog is an on-going priority for the programme but challenges still remain.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Targeted communication and promotion of the BowelScreen programme was undertaken to increase uptake of the programme amongst eligible men and women aged 60-69 years.
Participation amongst men was still lower than women and focused campaigns targeting men were undertaken during the year, including through Men’s Sheds and at the Ploughing Championship.
Diabetic RetinaScreen –
A digital surveillance screening programme and model of care continued to be rolled out successfully on a pilot basis.
This digital surveillance, when fully implemented, will enhance the patient treatment pathway by removing the requirement for a hospital outpatient appointment.
Uptake of the screening programme by people with diabetes aged 12 and over remained high with the number of people attending greater than was targeted. Scoping Inquiry into the
CervicalCheck Screening
Following discovery of the issues which emerged in relation to the CervicalCheck screening programme, a Serious Incident Management Team was established in April and a helpline set up to allow women with concerns regarding previous smear tests to get information.
In May, the Government established a scoping inquiry led by Dr Gabriel Scally.
A Steering Group was established to oversee the implementation of recommendations under the auspices of the CervicalCheck Steering Committee established by the Minister and work commenced on receipt, in June, of the first progress report from the scoping inquiry, containing six recommendations.
Dr Scally published his final report in September which contained 50 more recommendations that will improve both the CervicalCheck screening programme and other screening programmes.
An Implementation Plan for all the recommendations, setting out 126 actions, was published in December.
Population Health and Wellbeing
Behaviour change campaigns 2018 #RespectProtect a new sexual health campaign was launched to provide information on many aspects of sexual health, proving greater flexibility in conveying more targeted and credible safer sex messages to young people.
A national public awareness campaign, in partnership with the Irish Pharmacy Union, was also launched to increase public awareness of the emergency hormonal contraceptive.
The campaign is supported by the new website www.sexualwellbeing.ie.
Helen Deely, Programme Lead, Sexual Health and Crisis Pregnancy Programme; Darragh O’Loughlin, Secretary General, Irish Pharmacy Union; Grainne O’Leary, Hanover Quay Pharmacy and Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD.
In light of the upward trend in cocaine use and associated deaths, the Do You Use Cocaine campaign was launched for drug users and health professionals with the Ana Liffey Drug Project to raise awareness of the dangers of using cocaine.
More on this can be viewed on www.drugs.ie.
Pictured at the campaign launch: Dr Eamon Keenan Consultant Psychiatrist and HSE Clinical Lead for Addiction (centre), Emma Lynam and Áine O’Connell HSE Communications (left), Tony Duffin (CEO), Rebecca Doyle, Paul Duff and Nicki Killeen from the Ana Liffey Drug Project.
A number of HSE campaigns continued in 2018 to promote the health and wellbeing of the population and to make public health services more accessible such as: Ask About Alcohol – improving people’s knowledge about alcohol and how it affects us health wise
Your Best Shot – annual influenza campaign encouraging staff and at risk groups to get vaccinated against flu.
Little Things – focusing on the little things we can do to protect our mental health.
Dementia: Understand
Together – increasing understanding, keeping friendships, community and family connections alive so that more people can live well with dementia.
Protect Our Future – providing information on the importance of the
QUIT – continuing to provide free, personalised support to help people to quit smoking.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Community Healthcare
Community healthcare services include primary care, social inclusion, disability services, mental health, older persons’ services and palliative care services, and are provided for children and adults, including those who are experiencing marginalisation and health inequalities.
Primary Care
Working to deliver accessible, comprehensive, continuous and co-ordinated primary care to service users close to home through community-based interventions, reducing the need for admission to hospital.
Services include primary care teams, community healthcare networks, general practice and social inclusion.
A wide range of core services are provided by GPs, nursing and health and social care professionals, working with wider community services (disability, mental health, older people and palliative) and acute hospital services in response to service user needs.
People with Disabilities
Supporting and enabling people with disabilities to live the life of their choosing in their own homes, in accommodation that is designed and/or adapted as necessary to meet their needs, enabling them to live ordinary lives in ordinary places as independently as possible.
Services are provided to those with physical, sensory, intellectual disability and autism in day, respite and residential settings.
Services include personal assistant, home support and other community supports.
Mental Health
Promoting positive mental health to enable people get the most out of spending time with their families and friends.
Successfully treating those who experience mental health problems within a primary care setting, with less than 10% being referred to specialist community-based mental health services.
Specialist mental health services include acute inpatient services, day hospitals, outpatient clinics, community-based mental health teams (child and adolescent mental health service, general adult and psychiatry of later life), mental health of intellectual disability, community residential and continuing care residential services.
Older People
Empowering older people to live independently in their own homes and communities for as long as possible.
Improving the quality of life for those with more complex health and social care needs by shifting the delivery of care towards community-based, planned and co-ordinated care.
Services include home supports, day care, transitional care, short-stay and long-stay residential care.
Community healthcare services are delivered across nine Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs) and are provided through a mix of HSE direct provision as well as through voluntary section 38 and 39 service providers, GPs and private providers.
The Chief Officer in each CHO has full responsibility for the delivery of all primary, community, social and continuing care services within their area, working to ensure appropriate integration with secondary care and all appropriate stakeholders.
Co-ordinated care to those experiencing homelessness
The Safetynet homeless primary care team, which is funded by the HSE, provides co-ordinated care to those experiencing homelessness in conjunction with St. James’s Hospital, the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital and mental health services.
The team won the Supporting a Healthy Community Award at the Health Service Excellence Awards 2018.
Through nine fully equipped GP and nurse clinics, care is provided to approximately 500 homeless people monthly.
In-reach specialty primary care and mental health services are provided to homeless accommodation with out of hours outreach service provided through mobile health units.
A primary care team with a difference.
Dr Fiona O’Reilly leading her team to success and winning a Health Service Excellence Award in 2018.
Improving the quality, safety, access and responsiveness of services to support a decisive shift to primary care •
Community Healthcare Networks (CHNs) are essential to the development of smooth, clear pathways of care between community and acute services.
Significant planning was undertaken in preparation for the implementation of CHNs in 2019 to support the delivery of a model of integrated and patient-centred care, ensuring optimal care is being provided in the most appropriate setting.
Coverage and services provided by Community Intervention Teams (CITs) and Outpatient Parenteral Antimicrobial Therapy (OPAT) services was expanded to facilitate avoidance of admission to and support early discharge from hospitals.
New services opened in Sligo and Laois/Offaly.
Hospitals were also supported to increase the number of patients who are taught to self-administer intravenous antibiotics allowing them to access their care away from hospital and closer to home.
Progress is on-going in three of the CHOs to expand or establish paediatric eye care teams with new sites being selected and equipped and staff recruitment underway.
GP Services –
Direct access by GPs to ultrasound was further strengthened with 23,471 ultrasounds provided in a number of CHOs thus minimising the need for referrals to outpatient departments.
A contract was agreed to allow GPs to provide terminations at nine weeks of pregnancy and under in a primary care setting.
The recruitment of 111 assistant psychologists and 20 staff grade psychologists was completed, funded by mental health services.
16 primary care centres became operational, bringing the total number of primary care centres in operation to 126.
Primary Care Island Services Review was published focusing on the provision of health services to nearly 3,000 people living on 18 islands off the coast of Ireland.
The review sets out 71 recommendations designed to provide a fair, high quality and sustainable primary care services to island communities.
Hepatitis C –
1,615 patients received treatment as part of the hepatitis C treatment programme.
A new patient-focused on-line resource was launched on World Hepatitis Day 2018 and is available on www.hse.ie/hepc.
It provides easy to understand information regarding symptoms, treatment and prevention of hepatitis C and is aimed at those who may be at risk or who in the past may have been at risk of contracting hepatitis C.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Primary Care
Improving health outcomes for the most vulnerable in society
Engagement with service users
Addiction Services •
Implementation of Reducing Harm, Supporting Recovery, A health-led response to drug and alcohol use in Ireland, 2017-2025 was further progressed: – Training was delivered to GPs and pharmacists in the community to facilitate the roll-out of suboxone as an alternate opioid substitution treatment to methadone.
Implementation of Rebuilding Ireland, Action Plan for Housing and Homelessness, 2016 progressed through: –
Roll-out of the National Hospital Discharge Protocol for Homelessness (Guidance Framework), supporting the development and pilot implementation of a Dublin homeless hospital discharge protocol and model of care.
Enhanced in-reach specialty primary care services to homeless accommodation and increased outreach services for difficult to reach homeless people with complex needs.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Expansion and development of services through section 39 service providers and regional homeless supports was further supported with regard to accommodation (temporary and long term), specialist multi-disciplinary supports and other services.
Provision of wrap-around health support for housing first tenancies in line with the Housing First National Implementation plan 2018-2021.
The expansion of such services was rolled out in Cork, Limerick, Galway and Waterford and enhancement of existing Dublin housing first programmes was rolled out through the service reform fund.
Traveller, refugee, asylum seeker and Roma communities •
A number of initiatives were progressed to improve the mental health of the Traveller community including the appointment of Traveller Mental Health Co-ordinators in six CHOs, with appointments pending in the remaining three CHOs.
A Roma primary healthcare project commenced.
The Mobile Health and Screening Unit, established to provide health screening and basic primary care for refugees and other marginalised groups, conducted 1,644 assessments across the country.
This service, delivered by Safetynet primary care in partnership with social inclusion services comprises a core health team of a GP, nurses, a radiographer and an interpreter.
An innovative development is the establishment of a radiographic service in the unit that is linked to the National Integrated Medical Imaging System (NIMIS) at St. James’s Hospital.
Primary Care
In line with the Second National Strategy on Domestic, Sexual and Gender-based Violence 2016-2021 and Ireland’s Second National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security 2015-2018, 160 frontline staff undertook domestic, sexual and gender-based violence (DSGBV) training and 25 participants commenced a second national DSGBV train the trainer programme.
Social Inclusion services were involved in the development of LGBTI+ National Youth Strategy 2018-2020, which has three main goals for LGBTI and young people.
They are to create a safe, supportive and inclusive environment, to improve their mental, physical and sexual health and wellbeing and to develop the research and data environment to better understand their lives.
Primary Care Reimbursement Service Delivering primary care schemes through the primary care reimbursement service The Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS) supports the delivery of primary care services by providing reimbursement services to 7,000 contractors for the provision of health services to members of the public in their own community.
PCRS also manages the National Medical Card Unit to assess eligibility for Primary Care schemes.
The reduction in the prescription charge and in the monthly threshold, and the increase in the earnings disregard for those on Disability Allowance (intended to enable people with disabilities to work while maintaining their medical card), was implemented from the start of the year.
Prices of patent-expired medicines were reduced as generic and biosimilar products became available.
Roll-out commenced in September of the scheme to provide GP visit cards to those in receipt of carers allowance or carers benefit, with approximately 3,000 people receiving the card.
The Freestyle Libre flash glucose monitoring system is a device which can be used as an alternative to invasive daily injections of insulin, alleviating inconvenience and discomfort for children and young adults and a positive step in the management of diabetes.
Following a review by the HSE’s Health Technology Assessment Group, reimbursement of FreeStyle Libre for children and young adults with type 1 diabetes was approved under the Community Drugs Schemes (subject to review at one year).
Improving service provision through technology • New services were launched to allow on-line application for the medical card and Drugs Payment Scheme service.
The system is accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week and, for the medical card, users can immediately find out if they may be eligible.
• A new dental on-line claim system was launched allowing Dental Treatment Services Scheme contractors to submit dental claims on-line.
A second phase will see the roll-out of the scheme to dentists applying on-line for prior approval from their principal dental surgeon which will in turn improve the turnaround time for approval for patients receiving treatment under the scheme.
• The High Tech Ordering and Management System (High Tech Hub) went live for all community pharmacies in March, streamlining administration of the scheme for pharmacists and providing enhanced visibility of stock management and spending on the scheme to the HSE.
Five-year-old Ella Treacy from Dublin at the launch of the new on-line medical card service.
Applications in relation to new drugs and new uses of existing drugs were assessed and reimbursed in accordance with the procedures outlined in the Framework Agreement.
Disability Services
Effective participation in decision-making
As part of implementation of Transforming Lives, Effective Participation in Decision-Making Planning for Ordinary Lives in Ordinary Places was launched in September and was developed in collaboration with service users, families, carers and organisations working with those with disabilities.
The plan identifies four core values that will motivate, guide and direct the effective participation of people with disabilities, and families, in decision making.
These are autonomy, respect, creative responses, and mutual support.
A step by step guide to implementation was also developed that provides clear information for managers and staff to support them to build the capacity of people with disabilities, their families and advocates to successfully participate in effective decision making process that directly affect their lives.
Transforming Lives – reform programme to move towards community-based, person-centred models of care •
Towards Personalised Budgets for People with a Disability in Ireland
– Report of the Task Force on Personalised Budgets was published, setting out how personalised budgets could work as a funding mechanism for people with a disability.
A project manager was recruited to implement the recommendations of the Task Force.
The National Disability Inclusion Strategy 2017-2021 is a whole of Government approach to improving the lives of people with disabilities and incorporates a number of policies including the Comprehensive Employment Strategy for People with Disabilities 2015-2024.
A process has commenced to support people with disabilities who have access to adult day places, to defer that place while they explore mainstream work or further education options.
Martin Naughton, a member of the group responsible for developing the plan, which was dedicated to his memory.
Martin is remembered as an inspirational leader, a communicator and networker who kept driving the message on behalf of those with disabilities Nothing About Us, Without Us.
In conjunction with the Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government and the DoH, 91 houses were purchased and are being upgraded to provide homes to those transitioning to community services from institutional care.
Time to move on from congregated settings – A Strategy for Community Inclusion – supporting the move from institutional to community settings •
Supporting independence and choice for people with disabilities was further enabled through continued implementation of Time to Move on from Congregated Settings – A Strategy for Community Inclusion.
155 people transitioned from institutional settings to more appropriate accommodation in the community.
The strategy identified over 4,000 people in congregated settings and this has now been reduced to less than 2,200.
Disability Services
As part of an innovative programme of change, supported by Atlantic Philanthropies, Genio, the DoH and the HSE, a range of programmatic inputs have been established, including service user and staff mentoring and training as well as establishing the role of community connectors, to facilitate access to mainstream community supports and services.
In partnership with Genio, work is on-going to build on learning to date which aims at better and more co-ordinated strategic alignment of statutory roles in the area of housing, training, employment and education.
Delivering on service improvements and focusing on compliance with HIQA regulatory standards, implementation of the National Quality Improvement Operational Plan for Disability Services in Ireland (2018-2020) has been a key focus.
All designated centres for people with disabilities have been registered by HIQA.
A range of actions have been implemented to improve quality within disability residential centres as follows: – –
Establishment of a Change Hub on HSELanD providing tools and supports for disability residential providers which span a spectrum of key competency areas such as governance and leadership, personal planning and self-assessment tools.
Approximately 130 people participated in this event.
Establishment of a webinar series involving the active participation of 40 disability residential centres on a range of regulatory topics such as risk management, safeguarding and personal planning.
New Directions – improving day services to enable people to have choice and options about how they live their lives and how they spend their time •
Promoting and developing independent life skills for students leaving secondary school, through appropriate day services is a focus in implementing New Directions.
Approximately 1,500 young people leaving school or graduating from rehabilitative training programmes were supported during the year.
A person-centred planning framework was developed.
Interim standards for New Directions through the EASI (Evaluation, Action and Service Improvement) process commenced.
Services for children and young people ensuring one clear pathway to services •
As part of the reconfiguration of 0-18s disability services into children’s disability networks, the recruitment process for children’s disability network managers progressed and will be completed in early 2019.
Implementation of the joint protocol between Tusla and the HSE, the National Access Policy, including recommendations from the Children’s Ombudsman (the ‘Molly’ Report) progressed with workshops delivered to managers responsible for implementation within the CHOs.
Neuro-Rehabilitation strategy •
The National Strategy and Policy for the Provision of Neuro-Rehabilitation Services in Ireland (Implementation Framework 2019-2021) was published which is a three year plan, built on a 10-step programme encompassing clear governance structures, population planning and a mapping approach to inform service development requirements to improve the quality of life of people living with neurological conditions.
To progress the implementation of the strategy, a project has been designed that demonstrates the operation of the managed clinical rehabilitation network in line with the model of care for rehabilitation medicine.
Respite support for those with disabilities and their families
Government Disability Respite Programme 2018 •
Additional investment has greatly enhanced provision of respite services across the country.
Additional facilities opened in each CHO, benefiting a total of 763 people in 2018.
In addition, 15,144 additional hours of in-home respite sessions were delivered to approximately 400 people and 1,296 alternative respite sessions were delivered through holiday clubs and evening/weekend sessions.
Mental Health
Advanced on-line resources available www.yourmentalhealth.ie was updated to provide a significantly improved experience for those seeking mental health information, supports and services.
People can now access personalised options through a search tool that generates information on on-line resources, telephone and face-to-face services relevant to a wide range of mental health issues including depression, anxiety and stress.
Pictured at the launch of the redeveloped website: Minister of State with special responsibility for Mental Health and Older People, Jim Daly TD, Shazny McNally, Rebekah Connolly, Deividas Morkunas, Aine O’Connell and Caitlin Grant.
Promoting positive mental health •
Connecting for life sets out a vision of an Ireland where fewer lives are lost through suicide: –
An additional five local Connecting for Life Suicide Prevention Action Plans were developed bringing the total to 17 plans developed nationwide.
More on these can be seen within the CHO sections of this Annual Report.
Suicide bereavement programmes for staff and communities were developed in collaboration with the Irish Hospice Foundation.
Two suicide prevention training programmes were implemented (safeTALK and ASIST).
A Best Practice Guidance for Suicide Prevention Services to help ensure safe and high quality services for people vulnerable to suicide was developed.
An outcomes-based monitoring and evaluation system of suicide prevention training is in place.
An interim strategy review of Connecting for Life implementation was progressed.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Research on suicide prevention • The National Office for Suicide Prevention, Annual Report 2017 and the National Suicide Research Foundation’s Self Harm Registry Report 2017 were launched with provisional data for 2016 and 2017 indicating a decreasing trend in Ireland’s suicide rate.
• The Men’s Health Forum in Ireland and the HSE launched Middle-Aged Men and Suicide in Ireland Report that examines why middle aged Irish men have the highest rate of suicide of all age groups in Ireland.
• A new study carried out by the National Office for Suicide Prevention and the Irish College of General Practitioners found that 77% of survey respondents have experienced a patient suicide.
The study highlighted that GPs consistently reported a desire for further suicide prevention training and that, for those who had undertaken further training, they showed a more positive attitude towards suicide prevention, more confidence in dealing with patient needs and identifying appropriate service for onward referral.
Mental Health
Implementation plans were completed for The National Framework for Recovery in Mental Health 2018-2020 building on the committed efforts of service users, family members, carers and service providers to develop a more recovery-oriented mental health service.
Two new Recovery Colleges were opened to support people with mental health needs to engage in recovery through education.
Promoting simple and powerful day-to-day steps to protect our own mental health and support the people we care about is the focus of the LittleThings campaign.
New creative messaging relevant to second level students was developed and launched in November.
Let’s Get Active guidelines were launched aimed at supporting staff to promote awareness of the benefits of physical activity as a powerful therapeutic tool for people with mental health difficulties.
Implementation of Clinical Programmes –
A new model of care, developed in partnership with Bodywhys and the College of Psychiatrists of Ireland, for the treatment of eating disorders in Ireland was launched.
The first two dedicated teams to provide specialist eating disorder services commenced in May serving CAMHs and adult services across Dublin South, Kildare and West Wicklow Community Healthcare and Midlands Louth Meath Community Healthcare.
A third team is in recruitment for Cork Kerry Community Healthcare.
A model of care was developed for people with severe and enduring mental illness and complex needs and two specialist rehabilitation inpatient units were opened to provide specialist interventions for people with severe and enduring mental illness and complex needs.
Improving access to mental health services and improving service user flow •
Enhancement of primary care-based services –
An evaluation of Jigsaw services, funded by the HSE to provide primary care mental health interventions to young people, was undertaken which will inform future service developments.
Enhancement of secondary mental health services –
One new CAMHs team was put in place, increasing the total to 70 teams nationally, and one psychiatry of later life team was also developed increasing the total to 31 teams nationally.
In partnership with the national youth organisation, SpunOut, 16 videos were created to give introductory information on CAMHs, how it fits within wider health services and the routes and pathways for referrals.
Seven-day per week community mental health services were enhanced in all CHOs to ensure supports for vulnerable young persons in line with Connecting for Life.
The recruitment process for ten advanced nurse practitioners commenced.
Implementation of the HSE’s Specialist Perinatal Mental Health Services Model of Care commenced.
Specialist perinatal mental health multi-disciplinary teams are up and running in the maternity hospital/ service hub of three of the Hospital Groups.
The construction of the new national forensic hospital commenced and is on target to deliver 170 beds in 2020.
Older Persons’ Services
Dementia Understand Together
Moments in Time garden at Bord Bia’s Bloom is an initiative of the Dementia Understand Together campaign, which aims to create an Ireland that embraces and includes people with dementia, and which displays solidarity with them and their loved ones.
To coincide with the unveiling of the garden, the campaign has published its Top Tips for a Dementia-friendly Garden for members of the public on-line at www.understandtogether.ie/bloom which includes recommended plants to stimulate memory.
An ambassador for Dementia: Understand Together, Nora Owen (former Minister for Justice) unveiled the campaign’s Moments in Time show garden at Bord Bia’s Bloom.
Providing the appropriate supports following an acute hospital episode focusing on delayed discharges •
Extra funding was provided in March to enhance delivery of services during adverse weather conditions, providing 156,000 additional home support hours and supporting approximately 300 additional people to leave hospital which otherwise would not have been possible.
6,874 transitional care beds were also made available.
More on the Winter Plan can be seen on page 30 of this Annual Report.
Enhancing home support services •
The HSE moved to a single funded home support service, combining the home help service and the home care package scheme into a single home support service for older people.
This change improves accessibility and experience of these services for older people and their families.
It makes the home support service easier to understand and reduces complexity of the application process.
The delivery of intensive home care packages remains separate.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
The Consumer Directed Home Support, an approach to delivering home support at home was introduced as an option, giving people greater control and choice in relation to days and times of service delivery.
A new tender for home support services was completed which provides a list of HSE approved providers for the delivery of home supports for those who require it when HSE directly employed staff are not available.
Preventing harm from falls •
Slips, trips and falls are the leading cause of injury in people aged over 65 years and can have a devastating impact, causing suffering and loss of independence and for some, the need for nursing home care.
AFFINITY, which is the HSE’s national falls and bone health project aims to build a system wide approach to preventing harm from falls in Ireland.
As part of this work, the HSE, together with the State Claims Agency, hosted a symposium on falls prevention and bone health in Dublin Castle where more than 200 delegates attended.
With representatives from the HSE, State Claims Agency, Age Friendly Ireland and Older People’s Council, attendees had the opportunity to hear about the pioneering work in falls prevention and bone health both nationally and internationally with speakers from Ireland, New Zealand and Scotland.
Older Persons’ Services
Improving services and supports for people with dementia
Implementation of the Single Assessment Tool
Implementation of The Irish National Dementia Strategy continued with work in progress under each of the priority areas: better awareness and understanding, timely diagnosis and intervention, integrated services supports, training and education, and leadership.
Work progressed with key stakeholders in eight pilot sites nationally to develop a process for the design and delivery of personalised intensive home care packages to people with dementia.
The Single Assessment Tool which uses the international Residential Assessment Instrument (interRAI) assessment suite for older people continues to be implemented.
This software supported information system provides a comprehensive, holistic assessment of individuals healthcare needs to support personalised care planning.
InterRAI assessments are being implemented for older people who are seeking access to home support services and to the NHSS, so that care is provided in the most appropriate setting based on the person’s identified needs.
Memory technology resource rooms provide a safe environment for people with memory difficulties and their families to discuss challenges encountered in their daily lives.
Assistive technology enables a person to complete day to day tasks and manage risks in the home, thus maintaining independence, improving the person’s quality of life and reducing stress for carers.
23 memory technology resource rooms were launched across the country.
Supporting implementation of the Integrated Care Programme for Older People •
Work continued with the integrated care programme for older people to support the transfer of learning from pioneer sites established in 2016 to 13 demonstrator sites in 2018.
As part of implementing integrated care for older persons in Ireland, Early Stage Insights and Lessons for Scale Up and Case Management Approaches to Support Integrated Care for Older Adults were launched at the Integrated Care Programme for Older Persons networking day in December. Residential care services continue to be provided in line with regulations.
Implementation of findings from the Review of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme, A Fair Deal, in conjunction with the DoH, progressed including reconfiguration of the Nursing Homes Support Offices, which will be completed in 2019.
Recruitment of clinical leads for SAT continued in six of the nine CHOs, with the recruitment process almost complete in the remaining CHOs.
A train the trainer approach is in place with training provided to 140 assessors (clinicians) and 602 nonassessors (other healthcare personnel) on the use of the interRAI system in clinical practice.
A further 1,402 staff have attended information sessions.
Over 3,000 older people in both community and hospital locations have received interRAI assessments.
Palliative Care
Palliative care focuses on helping people of all ages to live well with an illness that is life-limiting and to achieve the best quality of life as their illness progresses.
Improving palliative care services for patients and families facing life-limiting illnesses •
Implementation of the Palliative Care Services, Three Year Development Framework 2017-2019 which aims to ensure a seamless care pathway across inpatient, home care, nursing home, acute hospital and day services was progressed.
Two redeveloped palliative care units opened in south Dublin and Limerick providing a total of 66 single patient rooms, as well as modern facilities for families, day care services and home care teams.
Six additional palliative care inpatient beds were opened in Kildare.
Evaluation of the Children’s Palliative Care Programme, 2016 was further implemented with the recruitment of a national co-ordinator for children’s palliative care and a second palliative care consultant paediatrician.
Providing high quality residential care including implementation of the review of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS) •
Delivery of community healthcare services through the nine CHOs aims to increase access, quality and integration of care to people in local communities.
Many service improvements took place within our CHOs during the year and a flavour of these is included over the following pages.
Community Healthcare Organisations
Nine Community Healthcare Organisations…
Donegal,
Sligo
Leitrim,
Cavan
Monaghan
Providing care for those with complex needs close to family life Slí na Daoine, a group of houses that provides semi-independent living for people with disabilities in Co. Monaghan was officially opened.
Antoine House which is part of these 11 houses was also opened and offers an opportunity for those with a disability to live within a family environment as close to family life as possible.
Minister of State with special responsibility for Disabilities, Finian McGrath T.D. at the official opening of Antoine House and Slí na Daoine, Co. Monaghan.
Healthy Ireland Implementation Plan 2018-2023 was launched.
Sligo City Alcohol Strategy 2018-2023, developed by Sligo Healthy Ireland project, in conjunction with the North West Regional Drug and Alcohol Task Force was launched.
Ballytivnan Training Centre hosted a Fun Fest day for adults with disabilities, organised by service users.
Community Health Synchronisation – CoH-Sync, developed by the Co-operation and Working Together (CAWT) cross-border health partnership commenced, aimed at supporting people to improve their health and wellbeing.
Alternative respite services were delivered to adults and children with intellectual disabilities and to adults and children with physical and sensory disabilities. A tender was awarded for the provision of additional residential services.
The Triple P parenting programme was launched in Sligo/Leitrim.
This is a free evidence-based positive parenting programme.
Day services were provided to 122 people with disabilities leaving school and rehabilitative training.
This initiative allows young people to engage to inform the planning and development of mental health services to best meet their needs.
Ballymote Primary and Mental Health Care Centre was officially opened.
The mPower Project was launched aimed at supporting older people with long-term conditions or chronic illnesses to live well, safely and independently in their own homes.
300 delegates including service users, carers and families attended the Mental Health Service International Conference in Cavan.
An Integrated Care for Older Persons workshop took place seeking feedback from older people in Sligo and Leitrim.
The Primary Care Island Services Review was overseen by the CHO. This review encompasses 3,000 people living on 18 islands off the coast of Ireland.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Community Healthcare Organisations
Community Healthcare West
Enabling participation in prestigious sporting events
Six residents from Áras Attracta/Mayo Community Living were among the 1,800 athletes who took part in the Special Olympic Ireland Games.
The real measure of success can be seen in the impact that participation has made on the participants lives.
A new purpose built acute adult mental health unit opened in Galway providing a modern, safe, therapeutic environment for people needing inpatient care.
A series of meetings took place throughout the region with mental health services, including with family members and carers.
The results of these events will inform and influence person-centred service improvement initiatives.
A memory technology resource room for people with dementia and their families opened in Boyle Primary Care Centre.
Bernard Dunne former world champion boxer, Seamus Brennan winner of two gold medals and Fiona Mulligan chaperone.
Community Healthcare West Healthy Ireland Implementation Plan 2018-2022 was officially launched.
Áras Mhuire Community Nursing Unit, Tuam received a public health award in recognition that 93% of staff received the flu vaccine in the 2017/2018 season.
A total of 1,159 staff participated in the Staff Step Challenge.
New primary care centres were officially opened in Tuam, Co. Galway; Boyle, Co. Roscommon; Westport, Ballinrobe and Claremorris, Co. Mayo.
Disability day services were successful in their application for Social Reform Fund grants through Genio for a two year project to enhance the roll-out of New Directions.
As part of the on-going programme to support people with disabilities to transition to the most appropriate accommodation to meet their needs, three community houses opened to support residents move from Áras Attracta, with a further seven houses scheduled to open in 2019.
Award/Staff Recognition •
The inaugural Staff Recognition Awards were held in October.
The awards honour the achievements of those who have been either involved in a project, or provided a service that has made a real and lasting difference to health and social care service provision.
Of the 61 applications received, 19 were selected as winners across three categories Service Improvement, Exceptional Service and Innovative Projects.
Community Healthcare Organisations
Mid West Community Healthcare
Combined Healthy Ireland Family Fun Day
A Health and Wellbeing Strategic Plan for HSE Mid West Community Healthcare
– A Step in the Right Direction
The plan sets out a direction of travel over the next seven years and is focused on prevention, early detection and self-management.
A number of Healthy Ireland initiatives took place during the year including a Family Fun Day in conjunction with UL Hospitals Group, which included a 50k cycle, a 5k run/walk and a host of healthy and fun activities for all to enjoy.
A Strategy for a Healthy Tipperary 2018-2020 was launched.
Barrack View primary care centre in Limerick City was officially opened providing a wide range of integrated primary care services, helping to keep people well and minimising the need for patients to be admitted to hospital.
The Traveller Health Unit Strategic Plan 2018-2022 was launched supporting Traveller inclusion in general service provision through the primary health care project network.
An additional 1,610 respite nights were provided for both adults and children with a disability.
The Mid-West Interagency Safeguarding Committee Three Year Action Plan, 2018-2020 was launched.
A seminar marking 18 months of the Connecting for Life Mid West Plan took place at Thomond Park with over 300 partners and stakeholders attending.
A new perinatal mental health service was launched in conjunction with the University Maternity Hospital Limerick.
A programme was designed to up-skill public health nurses and registered general nurses to set up and manage leg ulcer clinics in the community, in partnership with vascular consultants and tissue viability nurses at University Hospital Limerick (UHL).
This programme delivers timely assessments to patients and reduces the demand on outpatient vascular clinics at UHL.
Chimers, the mental health service’s choir, which comprises staff, service users and supporters, participated in the Sing for Wellbeing Concert at University of Limerick concert hall.
The Robin Wing refurbishment was officially opened within Regina House, Kilrush, a 30 bed community nursing unit (CNU) providing 24 hour care to residents.
Robin Wing provides a modern purpose built environment which is comfortable and homely.
The new inpatient specialist palliative care centre at Milford Hospice in Limerick was officially opened.
The hospice contains 34 beds, all single rooms and four overnight rooms to support families and carers.
Community Healthcare Organisations
Cork Kerry Community Healthcare
Implementing Healthy Ireland COMPASS was the first CHO Healthy Ireland implementation plan launched in the country, and all areas took on the challenge to enable everyone to optimise their health and wellbeing.
Initiatives throughout the year included staff health checks, couch to 5k programmes and a staff wellbeing event in Tralee.
The first ever Kerry Health and Wellbeing Week took place in partnership with Cork and Kerry Community Healthcare.
A men’s wellbeing conference took place at Cork County Hall.
Both these events coincided with World Mental Health Day.
The CAMHs service improvement project helped to reduce the number of young people waiting over a year to be seen.
Electronic referral of patients commenced between GPs and two mental health home-based treatment teams in Cork.
A bright and modern 25-bed extension to Bandon Community Hospital officially opened.
The roll-out of a person-centred programme in community hospitals is being progressed.
It involves planning on a three-year basis for unscheduled hospital care.
Community-led initiatives include a winter respiratory pathway and the funding of a Frail Intervention Therapy Team (FITT) in Cork University Hospital ED.
All three mental health campuses on the north side of Cork City were declared tobacco-free.
Mary’s Campus, Gurranabraher, Cork, the largest of its kind in the country, opened.
Outreach GP-led gynaecological services, with clinical oversight from Cork University Maternity Hospital, commenced at Mallow primary health care centre.
Training was provided to 200 staff to enable them meet the health and social care needs of refugees.
To ensure people in residential care with a disability, are cared for in the most appropriate accommodation for their requirements, the ground floor of the St. Raphael’s centre in East Cork closed and residents moved to new homes in the community.
Supporting residents to move from Chluain Fhionnan, Co. Kerry was also progressed.
A four-bed respite house in Kilmorna, Co. Kerry for adults with a disability became fully operational.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Award/Staff Recognition •
The first annual Cork Kerry Community Healthcare Awards staff awards ceremony took place under the banner Making a Difference, honouring winners in nine categories.
Community Healthcare Organisations
South East Community Healthcare
Supporting those in need of respite care
Minister of State with special responsibility for Disabilities, Finian McGrath T.D. officially opens Windrock Respite Centre for people with disabilities and their families in Co. Wexford.
To support families providing care for adults with intellectual disabilities and special needs, a further 28 people are benefiting from the opening of Windrock respite centre in Co. Wexford.
This is a new four bedroom house supporting individuals to engage in meaningful activities both inside the home and out in the community.
Extra funding in 2018 also increased respite capacity in other areas including extra respite nights in South Tipperary and once off summer camps for preschool and school aged children.
To reduce the stigma around dementia and to support people and their families to come to terms with the challenges of coping with dementia, a number of community awareness sessions took place in Kilkenny and Carlow.
The sessions provided information on the supports available when dealing with dementia.
Connecting for Life Kilkenny was launched.
Primary care centres in Waterford City, Dungarvan, Carrick-on-Suir and Grogan’s Road, Wexford opened.
As part of an interagency pilot initiative, aimed at providing Roma and Travellers to progress into further training and employment opportunities in the area of health and social care, training programmes were delivered across Wexford and certificates presented to four of the Roma community that participated in a ten week youth and community course.
Mental Health Engagement forums were established across the counties enabling service users, their families, carers and supporters to contribute to the design, planning and evaluation of mental health services.
As part of the Community and Council Awards, Dungarvan Community Hospital was nominated for their On The Move programme under the Best Disability Access and Inclusion category.
The Public Health Nurse Oral Health Intervention initiative in Waterford won the Improving our Children’s Health Award at the Health Service Excellence Awards.
The goal of the project is to improve the dental health of young children and reduce the demand for dental extractions under general anaesthesia.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Community Healthcare Organisations
Community Healthcare East
Building primary care capacity
The development of Bray primary care centre which is being progressed through public private partnership will support the delivery of integrated primary care services in one location for the people of Wicklow.
This will enable a collaborative team approach to managing complex cases.
Along with a variety of primary care services, it will also provide general community adult mental health services.
Pictured above with Minister Simon Harris, T.D. were Martina Queally, Chief Officer and Loraine Kennedy, Health of Service Primary Care. •
There was an increase in the uptake of the flu vaccination by staff to 47%.
Staff participated in a number of health and wellbeing initiatives including mini health checks to 520 staff, waist watchers challenge, yoga, minding your wellbeing training and Sing for your Soul choir.
Orthodontic services moved to a state of the art facility in the Simms Building, Tallaght providing enhanced delivery of care through technologically advanced surgeries, training facilities, imaging and patient management systems.
A number of respite initiatives were implemented for people with disabilities including alternative methods (two projects) of respite for children in North Wicklow
The transfer of six people to more appropriate care settings was supported under the Time to Move on from Congregated Settings
– A Strategy for Community Inclusion programme.
In line with New Directions, an additional 129 day care places were provided benefiting 104 school leavers and 25 graduates from rehabilitative training programmes.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
The National Verotoxigenic E.
Coli Reference Laboratory (VTEC NRL) won the Innovation in Services Delivery Award at the HSE Service Excellence Award.
This initiative has significantly improved the Public Health Laboratory’s capacity to identify potential disease outbreaks and to protect the public from illness caused by VTEC resulting in substantial cost savings.
CAIRDEAS Clubhouse, mental health day service, Bray, Co. Wicklow was awarded the gold Active@Work award, by the Irish Heart Foundation.
Cairdeas members started a physical activity programme which included a walking group, tending to their garden allotment as well as football and tai chi.
The Regional Stroke Team was highly commended for their project, completed as part of the RCPI/HSE Diploma in Quality and Excellence in Primary Care.
This study investigated how the stroke service can better support the needs of service users through insights provided by their carers. Community Healthcare Organisations Dublin South, Kildare and West
Wicklow Community Healthcare
Benefiting quality of people’s lives in the community Belvilla CNU officially opened in October.
This is a recently refurbished modern 49 bed unit providing long-term care for older people in Dublin South City area.
A number of initiatives were progressed to support residents both within the CNU and out and about to reap the benefits of interacting with their community.
These included: • Teaming up with Cycling without Age and international IT Company Zendesk to obtain sponsorship of a trishaw.
Nancy with Morgan, a Zendesk volunteer, during one of their trips out on the Trishaw.
Community Healthcare Dublin South, Kildare and West Wicklow Healthy Ireland Implementation Plan 2018-2022 was launched.
The diabetes education and self-management for people with on-going and newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes (DESMOND) programme was rolled out.
It provides accurate and up to date information and an opportunity for people to meet and share experiences with others. •
A number of primary care centres were officially opened including Kilnamanagh/Tymon and Tallaght Academic Primary Care Centre, Co.
Dublin and Kilcock and Cellbridge, Co. Kildare.
The In Schools and Early Years Demonstration Project is being implemented and will provide tailored therapeutic supports to allow for early intervention in provision of speech and language therapy within schools across Dublin South, Kildare and West Wicklow.
It is a joint collaboration between the Department of Education and Skills, the Department of Children and Youth Affairs, the DoH and the occupational and speech and language therapy services.
• An eight week walking programme including provision of pedometers was conducted as part of a research project on the clinical effectiveness of a quality initiative walking programme.
Its aim was to improve physical activity for long-stay residents, proving the importance of supporting resident’s mobility and independent living inside the CNU.
St. Brigid’s Hospice was redeveloped as a centre of excellence delivering palliative care services to the people of Kildare and West Wicklow.
Services include palliative home care services, a 13 bed inpatient service and day services providing access to a multidisciplinary team to assist and support patients who wish to remain in their own homes.
Connecting for Life plans were launched for Dublin South, and for Kildare and West Wicklow, which set out very specific steps to deliver on actions that are relevant to the needs of people towards the prevention of suicide.
The Dublin South West Early Intervention and School Age Team Social Workers, facilitated Sibshops for children aged 7-13.
These groups provide an opportunity for brothers and sisters of children with developmental needs to meet with other siblings in a relaxed setting and know that they are not alone in their experience.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Community Healthcare Organisations
Midlands Louth Meath
Community Healthcare
Defending against the flu
The flu vaccine is the only defence against the flu and is the best shot for vulnerable people against the life-threatening complications of flu.
To enable staff to easily avail of the flu vaccination, a number of Peer Vaccination Clinics were held throughout the region to train staff to administer the flu vaccine to their colleagues in the areas in which they work.
In collaboration with Dundalk Institute of Technology, a Masterclass entitled Aggression and Violence within Acute Mental Health Settings: evidence to practice for benefit of all took place in Dundalk which was attended by 120 delegates.
A new EU INTERREG VA funded project called mPower was launched which targets those over 65 years of age, living with long-term conditions or chronic illnesses within the Drogheda and Carrickmacross area.
The two key aspects of the mPower project include reconnecting older people into community activities according to their interests and helping them manage chronic conditions such as diabetes and COPD using apps and other digital supports.
Cluain Lír CNU, Mullingar launched its vision for end-of-life care, developed and owned by all residents and staff as part of a project that is central to their work with the CEOL (Compassion End of Life) programme run by the Irish Hospice Foundation.
Rena Martin, Health Care Assistant is vaccinated by Sharon McGinty, Staff Nurse, Cottage Hospital, Drogheda.
A number of staff health and wellbeing initiatives were delivered with 937 staff attending staff health checks in collaboration with the Irish Heart Foundation.
Midlands Louth Meath CHO Healthy Ireland Implementation Plan 2018-2022 was launched.
Primary care centres opened in Drogheda, Co.
Louth and Tullamore, Co. Offaly.
A new Community Intervention Team was established in Laois and Offaly.
The pharmacy needle exchange programme was rolled out in Louth and Meath.
Bower House, Balbriggan was officially opened.
This six bed residential house for young adults with autism and/or an intellectual disability or other complex needs is a joint project with Dublin North City and County Community Healthcare and will provide regular planned breaks, to support families and carers in caring and supporting family members.
Connecting for Life Midlands, Louth, Meath, Suicide Prevention Action Plan 2018-2020 was launched.
Award/Staff Recognition •
The first annual Midlands Louth Meath Staff Excellence Awards was launched in September with awards in five categories.
Clonbrusk Primary Care Centre won the Primary Care Centre of the Year 2018 at the Irish Healthcare Centre Awards acknowledging the range of high quality services provided at the centre.
Community Healthcare Organisations
Empowering communities to enjoy a healthy lifestyle The Healthy Ireland Implementation Plan 2018-2022 for Dublin North City and County was launched.
The aim of the plan is to support and empower service users, communities and staff to enjoy health and wellbeing to their full potential.
Pictured above (L-R): Anne former DDG Operations; Mary Chief Officer and Stephanie, National Director Strategic Planning and Transformation.
Staff participated in 33 health and wellbeing projects throughout the year.
New primary care centres opened in Coolock, Grangegorman, Portmarnock and Balbriggan.
A Community Eye Care Multi-disciplinary Team was established in Grangegorman.
Following the implementation of the speech and language therapy service waiting list initiative, significant reductions in waiting times for children were achieved.
A revised model for psychology services was implemented with the appointment of 13 assistant psychologists and five clinical psychologists.
SAOR training, which is a standardised alcohol and substance misuse screening and brief intervention support, was provided to 282 staff.
Sexual and gender-based violence training was provided to 90 staff.
A community-based hepatitis C treatment initiative commenced with the pilot site launched in the City Clinic.
A shared learning event was attended by 130 delegates including service users, families and carers to demonstrate the many changes that have been implemented in line with the New Directions national guidance framework.
Connecting for Life, Dublin North City and County Suicide Prevention Action Plan 2018-2020 was launched.
Four mental health engagement forums were established to incorporate the views and voices of people who use mental health services, their families, carers and supporters.
Seven people were supported to move from mental health intellectual disability services to the most appropriate accommodation to meet their needs.
North Dublin participated in a pilot project facilitated by Genio on the provision of personalised care supports for people living with dementia.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Services
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Services refers to the broad range of services, including pre-hospital emergency care, that is provided within the acute hospital system.
Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Services Providing professional and compassionate clinical care and transport for patients, in partnership with the wider health service.
Acute Hospital Services Providing safe and effective patient-centred care to the population through seven Hospital Groups and forty-eight acute hospitals.
Cancer Services
Leading the development and provision of cancer care from prevention, early diagnosis and treatment, to appropriate follow-up and support in both the acute hospital and community settings.
Women and Infants’ Health
Leading the management, organisation and delivery of maternity, benign gynaecology and neonatal services.
Acute hospital services are provided to patients in 48 acute hospitals and through seven Hospital Groups, each led by a Chief Executive Officer and management team.
This governance structure facilitates improved access to quality services supported by robust management and accountability arrangements at all levels of the service.
Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Services
Eye in the Sky
In July, the NAS was delighted to announce the utilisation of the first drone within the service.
The HSE under the Emergency Management Framework has lead responsibility in dealing with medical emergencies involving chemical and biological materials.
The use of drones will enable enhanced communication at the scene of an incident by providing an eye in the sky at accident scenes, allowing observation of the high-risk incident ground quickly and prior to deployment of additional staff.
The drone will also give teams a quick overview of patients’ condition and location, allowing the leader to direct paramedics towards them.
The National Ambulance Service (NAS) is a demandled service serving the whole population of the state.
Working in conjunction with the Dublin Fire Brigade, the Irish Air Corps, the Irish Coast Guard and, at a community level, with First Responder teams, the NAS responds to emergency and urgent calls, transports intermediate care patients and undertakes adult, paediatric and neonatal retrievals.
Additional paramedics were deployed to improve response times in targeted areas including Galway, Donegal, Cork, Kildare and Monaghan. To support the expansion of intermediate care and aeromedical services, a recruitment process for additional staff was completed, enhancing performance and access for patients.
The Clinical Hub (phase 1 – Hear and Treat) which provides appropriate telephone advice on alternative pathways to care to 112/999 callers who do not have serious or life-threatening conditions commenced operations during the year.
The key benefits of this alternative model of care include: –
Care closer to home
Most appropriate pathway chosen and a reduction in ED attendances
Reduction in dispatches
Incidents dealt with more promptly.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Services
Storm Emma
Advanced paramedic Declan and Corporal Steve carried seven-year-old Logan 3km to get him to hospital during Storm Emma.
Logan needs medical equipment 24 hours a day and when the storm knocked out power lines he urgently needed to be brought to hospital.
However, blizzards and snow drifts meant no vehicles could get near his home.
Logan and his mother, Louise, started walking from their home and were met after a short distance by Declan and Steve who took turns carrying Logan, ensuring he reached hospital safely.
The number of Community First Responder schemes in place now stands at 210, in line with the NAS Implementation Plan.
Community First Responders are invaluable in responding to particular types of medical emergencies (cardiac arrest, respiratory arrest, chest pain, choking and stroke) where it is essential that the patient receives immediate life-saving care while an emergency response vehicle is en route.
The National Transport Medicine Programme, which transfers seriously ill patients for specialist treatment, was integrated into the NAS.
It is now known as the NAS Critical Care Retrieval Service and operates from the Retrieval Co-ordination Desk based in the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC).
From June, NEOC has provided a single point of contact for all retrieval requests.
A cross border Community Paramedic Project was launched during the year, a collaboration between the NAS, the Northern Ireland Ambulance Service and the Scottish Ambulance Service.
Community paramedics associated with the project received specialised training, accredited by Glasgow Caledonian University, which enables them to provide safe and effective care to patients in their own homes, reducing unnecessary ambulance transports to EDs.
The service operates in liaison with GP practices in Clones, Co. Monaghan and Buncrana, Co. Donegal.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Following the adoption of the Key Performance Indicator (KPI) Framework document, two new clinical KPIs were developed and tested during 2018.
Both KPIs will come into operation in 2019 as part of a move to measure the effectiveness of clinical care to patients.
The NAS has established formal engagement with the HSE National Patient Forum, allowing the NAS to seek input from patients/service users in the planning, design and delivery of services.
The Education and Competency Assurance Plan continued to be rolled out across the service.
A recruitment process for the appointment of clinical data analysts has commenced to enhance clinical competencies and improve the quality of patient care.
Fleet management and maintenance have been strengthened with the appointment of a NAS fleet and equipment maintenance manager.
Acute Hospital Services
Organ Donation Saves Lives
Double lung recipient David, pictured above with his wife Katie, completed his second marathon in Berlin in September this year having already ran the New York Marathon last year.
He is ever grateful to his donor and the donor’s family, who have saved his life.
In 2018, the families of 81 people who had died, donated the organs of their loved one courageously and generously.
Acute hospitals play a key role in improving the health of the population by providing services including pre-hospital care for adults and children, emergency care, urgent care, short term stabilisation, scheduled care, trauma care, acute surgery and critical care.
Improving patient and staff health and wellbeing
• Implementation of Healthy Ireland plans to ensure everyone enjoys physical and mental health and wellbeing to their full potential is well underway in Saolta University Health Care Group, UL Hospitals Group, RCSI, Dublin Midlands and Ireland East Hospital Groups.
Work has also commenced in the South/South West Hospital Group on the development of their plan.
The Food, Nutrition and Hydration Policy for Adult Patients in Acute Hospitals was approved in November and subsequently disseminated to Hospital Groups for implementation.
Uptake of flu vaccine among healthcare workers in hospitals increased to 44.8% in 2017/2018 compared to 34% in 2016/2017.
Health promotion managers are working with the Hospital Group Healthy Ireland leads to encourage the uptake of training programmes in Making Every Contact Count (MECC) and a skills workshop to ensure that hospital personnel have the required knowledge and skills to carry out behaviour change interventions.
As part of efforts to increase capacity in hospitals for patients, five additional critical care beds were opened in Cork University Hospital and the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital.
• New referral and elective care pathways to improve the patient journey commenced development for urology, ophthalmology, orthopaedics, ENT, general surgery, paediatrics and gynaecology.
A new action plan, aiming to reduce the number of patients waiting for inpatient or day case procedures was conjointly produced by the HSE, DoH and National Treatment Purchase Fund (NTPF).
The number of patients waiting for an inpatient or day case procedure reduced from a peak of 86,111 in July 2017 to 70,204 in December 2018.
In addition, the number of patients waiting over nine months almost halved from 28,124 in July 2017 to 14,910 at the end of 2018.
A proposal was agreed with the DoH to validate outpatient waiting lists for patients waiting from six to 24 months (a number totalling 249,838 patients).
As a result of the validation, 69,836 patients were identified as no longer requiring outpatient appointments, ensuring more timely access for those patients remaining on the waiting list.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Acute Hospital Services
1.72m patients discharged from hospital – 642,646 inpatient and 1,074,172 day case – an increase of 8,844 (0.5%).
1.47m emergency presentations to acute hospitals (an increase of 3.7%).
3.34m outpatient attendances (an increase of 1.5%).
84.3% of adults waited less than 15 months for an inpatient procedure and 92.9% for a day case procedure by the end of the year (89.8% and 83.9% respectively for children).
Developing children’s acute health services •
Additional staff were recruited to further develop spina bifida services in the Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street).
Work continued on the further development of the all-island paediatric cardiology service.
Developing and improving national specialties
• 70.4% of patients waited less than 52 weeks for an outpatient appointment by the end of the year.
Two additional heart/lung unit beds opened, with seven in total to be opened on a phased basis between 2018 and 2019.
Work is underway through the National Trauma Office to establish regional trauma networks and trauma units following publication of the report of the Trauma Steering Group, A Trauma System for Ireland, 2018.
Additional staff were recruited to further develop endoscopy and narcolepsy services.
Achieving the best possible patient outcomes is the aim of all our health services and a Steering Group was established for the National Review of Specialist Cardiac Services with a particular emphasis on the safety, quality and sustainability of services.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Ensuring quality and patient safety •
Acute Hospital Services
Marking World Asthma Day
A free information day for patients, public and staff was held at the Midland Regional Hospital Portlaoise to improve asthma awareness and care.
Ireland has the fourth highest prevalence of asthma worldwide.
The illness can cause a substantial burden on individuals and their families, restricting activities and reducing quality of life.
The multi-disciplinary respiratory team from the hospital were on hand on the day to answer questions, provide support and advise on how asthma can be identified and treated.
Lisa Egan, Candidate Advanced Nurse Practitioner, speaking at the asthma Information day.
Enhancing medicines management •
Work continued through the Acute Hospitals Drugs Management programme to further enhance medicines management, including improving access to medicines for patients and improving pharmaceutical value.
Supporting and progressing the policies and initiatives of the Office of the Chief Nursing Officer •
The final report on phase 1 of a framework to determine safe requirements for the nursing workforce in a range of major specialties (Framework for Safe Nurse Staffing and Skill Mix in General and Specialist Medical and Surgical Care Settings in Adult Hospitals in Ireland) was launched in April.
It has been adopted as Government policy and potential to roll-out nationally in model 4 hospitals is being explored.
Work has advanced on phase 2 of the framework to determine the numbers and skill mix required in emergency care settings.
Monitoring and performance managing financial allocations •
Perspectives from the Frontline
The ED Taskforce Unscheduled Care Forum ‘Perspectives from the Frontline’ took place in Dublin Castle in September.
The purpose of the forum was to provide frontline staff from across the health service with the opportunity to share their views, experiences and suggestions on how further improvements in managing the unscheduled care journey of patients through the healthcare system can be made.
The role of the ED Taskforce is to develop sustainable long-term solutions to ED overcrowding and its membership includes representatives from Hospital Groups, the DoH, patient advocates, staff representative bodies and the HSE.
Information on some of the work underway to address ED overcrowding can be seen under ‘Improving access and patient experience during the winter period’ in the Building a Better Health Service section of this Annual Report.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Acute Hospital Services
National Patient Experience Survey Over 13,000 patients participated in the 2018 National Patient Experience Survey representing a strong response rate of 50%.
The majority of patients, 84%, rated their hospital experience as good or very good.
In November, Listening Responding and Improving – the HSE response to the findings of the National Patient Experience Survey was published, outlining the work currently underway across our hospitals to improve patients’ experience.
Initiatives in place include:
• The National Healthcare Communications Programme, completed by over 500 staff in Cork, Kilkenny, Dublin, Galway, Waterford and Limerick, to improve the communication skills of healthcare professionals
• Volunteer and patient advocacy initiatives such as the project in St Luke’s Kilkenny ED to support patients with mental health difficulties and the Volunteer Befriender Programme in Nenagh Hospital
• Patient information on medications management and leaving hospital including Know Check Ask in Mayo University Hospital and the Saolta University Health Care Group Planning Your Discharge from Hospital Patient Information Leaflet.
Further information on the survey can be seen in the Listening to Our Service Users section of this Annual Report.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Cancer Services
Cancer incidence in Ireland
As part of the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026, several improvement initiatives are on-going covering various aspects of cancer services, including diagnosis, treatment, follow-up and survivorship support in both the hospital and community setting.
The key focus in 2018 was on implementation of the principles of the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026 – reducing the cancer burden, providing optimal care, and maximising patient involvement and quality of life.
An Irish Cancer Prevention Network has been set up in partnership between the National Cancer Control Programme (NCCP) and cancer charities.
A skin cancer prevention plan is being developed in conjunction with Healthy Ireland.
An Early Detection Project Group hosted by the NCCP commenced in December, looking at new ways to improve GP access to diagnostic tests for patients with possible cancer.
A group was established to improve public awareness of lung cancer symptoms.
A new report issued by the National Cancer Registry Ireland has indicated that the centralisation of cancer services has contributed to higher survival rates for patients, even after adjusting for factors such as age and social deprivation.
72% of all breast, prostate and lung cancer GP referrals are now received electronically.
A facility for including attachments has been developed, which should further assist the triage process.
There has also been a pilot of the pigmented lesion (suspected melanoma) GP referral form.
The Prostate Cancer GP Referral Guidelines were updated to reflect patient values, improve the quality of clinical care and reduce variation in practice.
As part of on-going work to improve the experience of and care for cancer survivors, two new guides, Sexual wellbeing after breast or pelvic cancer treatment – A Guide for Women and Good bone health after cancer treatment were launched.
• Cancer accounts for approximately 30% of deaths every year.
Tobacco use is the most important risk factor for cancer and is responsible for up to one third of all cancer deaths.
Work continued on the configuration and testing of the National Cancer Information System (NCIS), which is scheduled to go live in 2019.
The system will provide an e-health solution for cancer multi-disciplinary meetings, supporting the care of oncology and haemato-oncology patients including electronic prescribing, scheduling and administration of systemic anti-cancer therapy (SACT).
Recruitment of specialist clinical staff is underway for medical oncology, haematology, radiation oncology, surgical oncology and psycho-oncology services, and for additional staff to support rapid access clinics.
Work continued to support access for patients to new SACT agents and to support hospitals in meeting rising drug costs.
An additional 11 new SACT therapies were made available for the treatment of various cancers.
The National Cancer Control Programme Oral AntiCancer Medicines Model of Care Recommendations was published, in line with recommendation 23 of the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026.
Work continued on the development of the national chemotherapy regimens.
These regimens support safe, evidence-based and cost-effective cancer treatment for all Irish cancer patients with an additional 68 regimens completed during the year.
Recommendation 34 of the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026 states that the ‘NCCP will ensure that each hospital has a clearly defined framework for cancer patient safety and quality’ and work commenced in 2018 to develop a framework for all cancer centres.
The framework will provide greater clarity on processes and measures to improve quality and patient safety.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Women and Infants’ Health
The National Women and Infants’ Health Programme (NWIHP) was established to lead the management, organisation and delivery of maternity, benign gynaecology and neonatal services, strengthening these services by bringing together work undertaken across primary, community and acute care.
Key priorities in 2018 were ensuring equity of access for women and their infants to high quality, nationally consistent, women-centred maternity care, including preparation for the implementation of termination of pregnancy services to be in place from January 2019.
The implementation of the new model of care for maternity services is well underway and a governance structure with a number of work streams has been established to ensure consistency of approach.
An additional 50 midwives were approved in 2018, to support the development of community midwifery, and a quality and safety manager is being recruited for each maternity network to support the function of a Serious Incident Management Forum, dedicated to maternity services.
Alongside Birth Centres are in development with the aim of each Hospital Group having at least one such facility within their maternity services.
The centres provide comfortable, low tech birth rooms for normal risk mothers and babies with midwives leading and delivering care within a multi-disciplinary framework.
Creating a Better Future
Together The National Maternity Strategy 2016-2026 was developed to transform our approach to maternity services, ensuring that women and their babies have access to safe, high-quality care.
The recommendations are being implemented through the National Women and Infants’ Health Programme.
The strategy contains four key priorities:
• Mothers and families are supported and empowered to improve their own health and wellbeing.
• Women have access to safe, high-quality, nationally consistent, women-centred maternity care.
• Pregnancy and birth is recognised as a normal physiological process and, insofar as it is safe to do so, a woman’s choice is facilitated.
• Maternity services are appropriately resourced, underpinned by strong and effective leadership, management and governance arrangements, and delivered by a skilled and competent workforce in partnership with women.
Sarah, who used the pool during her labour, and one week old baby Fiadh with Sandra, Clinical Midwifery Manager 3.
Childbirth support
Water immersion in labour is now being offered in University Maternity Hospital Limerick as part of a range of supports for women with normal-risk pregnancy.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Women and Infants’ Health
Significant progress has been made across the Hospital Groups on the availability of anomaly screening.
Of the 19 maternity hospitals/units, 14 now provide all women with a 20 week anomaly scan, with a fifteenth site providing the scan but at a later date.
The remaining four units are working towards full provision of the service as capacity increases.
As part of Making Every Contact Count training, all staff are receiving training in identifying and discussing with women at ante-natal visits: –
Smoking cessation
Alcohol consumption
Emotional and/or mental health issues.
An anaesthetics model of care for maternity services is in development and will be piloted in 2019.
Over 100 additional staff are being recruited to improve the delivery of safe maternity services, including those required to support the introduction of the maternal and newborn clinical management system (MN CMS), which allows for the implementation of an electronic health record for all women and babies in receipt of maternity services.
An on-line resource is being developed to empower women to make informed decisions about their care, including details of the pathways of care and best available information on outcomes, risks, benefits and consequences associated with the different birth settings.
A benign gynaecology plan is being prepared to address the significant capacity issues around the country.
Following the referendum in May, extensive planning and engagement took place to prepare for the introduction of a safe, high quality termination of pregnancy service.
The hospital-based service commenced in nine hospitals from January 2019, increasing to ten in early 2019.
Following the pause in the use of transvaginal mesh devices during the year, the NWIHP is working with a multidisciplinary group, including patient advocates, to develop an implementation plan in response to the Chief Medical Officer’s Report, The Use Of UroGynaecological Mesh In Surgical Procedures, 2018.
The implementation plan will include appropriate consent forms and information for women, a system of training and credentialing, and the development of a register for transvaginal mesh device procedures.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Delivery of acute services through the seven Hospital Groups aims to improve the quality and efficiency of care to patients.
Many service improvements took place within our Hospital Groups during the year and a flavour of these is included over the following pages.
Delivering Hospital Care through Hospital Groups…
Letterkenny University Hospital
Children's University Hospital Cappagh
Wexford
University Hospital Waterford
Mercy University Hospital
Cork University Hospital
Bantry General Hospital
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Areas we serve
Children’s Hospital Group
Dublin Midlands Hospital Group
Ireland East Hospital Group
RCSI Hospital Group
Saolta University Health Care Group
South/South West Hospital Group
UL Hospitals Group St.
Children’s Hospital Group
Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street)
National Children’s Hospital (Tallaght)
Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin)
Academic partners:
University College Dublin
Royal College of Surgeons Ireland
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin City University
National University of Ireland Galway
University of Limerick
Storm Emma brought snow days to children all across the country, with children making the most of the novelty weather.
The snow came indoors for Holly who has been spending the last year at Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin) waiting on a heart transplant;
the ICU nursing team didn’t want Holly to miss out, so they brought the snow to her.
Holly’s parents, Jessica and Jamie, wanted to say a special thank you to the ICU team.
‘This has to be the most special snowman ever!
Little Holly got to play with some snow while in ICU at Crumlin’. •
The Children’s Health Act 2018 was announced by Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD, providing for the establishment of a single statutory entity, Children’s Health Ireland, to govern and operate paediatric services in Dublin across the existing locations at Crumlin, Temple Street and Tallaght.
The Children’s Hospital Group and the Office of the Ombudsman for Children launched the results of the Joining the Dots: Connecting Voices for child-friendly healthcare in hospital bringing together the views of children, their families and hospital staff on the delivery of services.
A review of work processes was carried out by the cardiology team in Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin).
A paediatric cystic fibrosis self-management app was developed in Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin).
Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin) was the overall winner at the Irish Healthcare Awards 2018 for their projects, Children’s Heart Centre: Shared Care of Paediatric Heart Transplantation between Ireland and England and Pelvic Osteotomies for the Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip – Virtual Clinic for Patients. Holly Carroll making a snowman in the ICU at Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin).
A new renal (the Gill Unit) and neurology OPD (the King Unit) was unveiled at Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street), offering superior clinical facilities, bright and spacious waiting rooms and patient play areas. The new OPD caters for over 6,500 children every year.
A Telehealth Trauma Assessment Clinic was established in the National Children’s Hospital (Tallaght), reducing the need for parents and children to attend the fracture clinic for follow up.
This has reduced attendance by 30% thus creating space for children with more complex fractures.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Dublin Midlands Hospital Group • • • •
Coombe Women and Infants University Hospital Midland Regional Hospital Portlaoise Midland Regional Hospital Tullamore Naas General Hospital
St. James’s Hospital
St James’s Hospital has gone digital with a new electronic patient record system which is expected to enhance patient safety and reduce waiting times.
The project, known as Project Oak as a reference to the paper that will be saved, is the largest-scale digitisation of inpatient records in an Irish hospital to date.
Dr Joseph Browne using the new electronic patient record.
Use of technology is being embraced to improve services for patients and their families.
Both St James’s Hospital and Tallaght University Hospital (TUH) have developed apps to provide users with fast and reliable hospital information.
This development is in addition to a number of other developments at the hospital including an early pregnancy assessment unit and established dating scanning service.
Following a staff survey, the Dublin Midlands Hospital Group and Midland Regional Hospital Tullamore produced an educational video to promote awareness of the benefits of being vaccinated against flu for the protection of individuals and their families.
In the video, former Galway Hurling All-Star, Sean Treacy, shares his near death experience of contracting the flu virus in an effort to highlight the dangers of flu.
Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy treatment is now available in St.
Luke’s Hospital, Rathgar. This is a new technique which is a more effective way of treating small lung cancers, giving a high dose of radiotherapy to a small portion of the lung. HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Coombe Women and Infants University Hospital celebrated 50 years of providing care for neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) babies on World Prematurity Day. The NICU has 1,000 admissions each year.
TUH celebrated its 20th anniversary with the first annual Hero Awards.
The employee recognition scheme celebrated the individuals and teams who go the extra mile and make a real difference to patients and families, supporting the hospital ethos of People Caring for People.
TUH opened a Memory Hut in September. This is the first hospital-based drop-in service to focus on brain health and dementia in Ireland.
This collaboration of staff from the specialist memory service, TUH volunteers and the Alzheimer’s Society of Ireland has created an informal weekly drop-in or drop-by service for people living with memory difficulties, members of the public, staff, patients and their families.
Ireland East Hospital Group
Cappagh National Orthopaedic Hospital
Mater Misericordiae University Hospital
National Maternity Hospital
Our Lady’s Hospital (Navan)
Regional Hospital Mullingar
Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital
St. Columcille’s Hospital (Loughlinstown)
St. Luke’s General Hospital (Carlow/Kilkenny)
St. Michael’s Hospital (Dun Laoghaire)
St. Vincent’s University Hospital •
Wexford General Hospital
It will also provide a space where industry can join with the hospital to develop innovative solutions to healthcare challenges.
A unified gynaecological oncology service was established at the Mater Misericordiae and St. Vincent’s University Hospitals to improve the patient journey and the quality of care for women availing of the service.
As part of this improvement work a standardised referral form and associated process have been defined to expedite patient access into the service.
During the year, improvement work focused on improving access for patients by enabling increased access to senior decision-makers, improving flow at triage, and developing visual management within the acute floor setting.
As part of on-going work to develop a model of care to meet the specific needs of older people, the Regional Hospital Mullingar, Wexford General Hospital and Our Lady’s Hospital (Navan) joined St. Luke’s General Hospital (Carlow/Kilkenny) on the frailty improvement journey with all four model 3 sites now implementing frailty screening in their hospitals.
At the Health Service Excellence Awards, the Frailty Intervention Team in Regional Hospital Mullingar were the recipients of both the Popular Choice and the Improving the Patient Experience awards for their implementation of a whole system pathway for frail older people.
Significant inroads have been made at Cappagh National Orthopaedic Hospital in relation to waiting lists.
All patients, who had been waiting longer than nine months for surgery at the end of the year, had a date for surgery scheduled within the first six weeks of 2019.
Closer links are being developed with community services through integrated care projects including community ophthalmology, virtual clinics for heart failure, the hepatitis C service plan, frailty initiatives and a winter preparedness process.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Hospital Groups
RCSI Hospital Group
Beaumont Hospital
Cavan General Hospital
Connolly Hospital
Louth County Hospital
Monaghan Hospital
Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital
Rotunda Hospital
Royal College of Surgeons Ireland
Beaumont Hospital launched the Hospital Slí na Sláinte walking initiative, in partnership with the Irish Heart Foundation and supported by Healthy Ireland.
Slí na Sláinte, which translates as path to health, encourages people in workplaces, schools and communities to incorporate more walking into their day, using mapped and measured routes.
Over 400 routes have been developed across the country, more than 50 of which are in HSE sites.
Fiona Emergency Department Nurse Manager and Joint Lead in Healthy Ireland, Tara, Irish Heart Foundation and Michele, Health Promotion Manager and Joint Lead in Healthy Ireland.
Midwife-led antenatal yoga classes have been introduced at Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital.
These classes offer the opportunity for local women to meet in a relaxed atmosphere and are taught by a midwife with qualifications in pre and post-natal fitness and antenatal yoga instruction.
A new 29 bed ward was opened in Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital in April, increasing hospital capacity.
The Rotunda Hospital led by example as 220 staff members were vaccinated for the flu vaccine in one day alone.
Early morning clinics to catch night staff, daily pop up clinics, email reminders, twitter feeds and posters were just some of the initiatives undertaken to alert staff to the service.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Scratch Films and RTÉ followed the comings and goings of the Rotunda Hospital, 24 hours a day for a total of 21 days.
The hospital is one of the most active maternity hospitals in all of Europe and the resulting series encapsulated the multitude of emotions that are part of everyday life within the hospital.
The redeveloped stroke unit in Connolly Hospital, which will improve the hospital experience for stroke patients, was officially opened in December by An Taoiseach, Leo Varadkar TD.
Louth County Hospital celebrated with patients and their families at a mid-summer event to acknowledge the transformation that has taken place in the hospital in how services are provided for dementia patients.
Dementia-friendly healing spaces, established on the ward for patients to relax in and enjoy, and a garden activity area are just some of the facilities available at the hospital.
Saolta University Health Care Group
Letterkenny University Hospital
Mayo University Hospital
Merlin Park University Hospital
Portiuncula University Hospital
• Roscommon University Hospital
• Sligo University Hospital
• University Hospital Galway
National University of Ireland Galway
In July the first HSE robotic-assisted prostatectomy was performed on a patient at University Hospital Galway.
Robotic surgery represents the highest international standard of surgery worldwide and is the most advanced form of minimally invasive surgery available to patients.
More than 70 men were successfully treated by the team in Galway in 2018.
Robotic surgery team at University Hospital Galway.
A new 75-bed ward block development at University Hospital Galway was officially opened by An Taoiseach Leo Varadkar TD.
The new building, over three floors, provides 75 single en-suite bedrooms, including six dedicated isolation rooms, along with a dedicated oncology ward, infection control ward and a haematology ward.
The second floor provides a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtered air supply to protect immunocompromised patients. •
A new Discharge Lounge was opened in Letterkenny University Hospital staffed by a clinical nurse manager and health care assistant to improve patient flow.
The initiative was an integral part of the hospital’s winter plan to decrease the waiting times for patients on trollies in the ED and the acute medical assessment unit (AMAU).
The Butterfly Scheme, which helps staff to identify people with temporary confusion, memory loss and dementia was introduced to Mayo University Hospital.
More than thirty staff members, from all areas in the hospital, volunteered as Butterfly Champions.
Midwifery-led clinics were introduced as part of Portiuncula University Hospital’s commitment to providing evidence-based maternity services in the community.
The antenatal clinics are based within the hospital with outreach clinics in Loughrea and Athlone.
The department of plastic surgery in Roscommon University Hospital held a Safe Sun and Awareness health promotion event in association with Roscommon GAA.
Sligo University Hospital was successfully awarded accreditation through the UK-based accreditation programme for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy known as the Joint Advisory Group.
Sligo was originally accredited in 2012 as one of only 15 sites in Ireland providing the National Colorectal Cancer Screening Service.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Hospital Groups
South/South West Hospital Group
Bantry General Hospital
Cork University Hospital
Lourdes Orthopaedic Hospital
Mallow General Hospital
Mercy University Hospital
South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital
South Tipperary General Hospital
University Hospital Kerry
University College Cork
Storm Emma hit Ireland during the first days of March, bringing extreme cold, snow, ice and arctic conditions to most of the country.
However, through the dedication of staff who found ways of getting to and staying at work, key services including maternity services at Cork University Maternity Hospital were able to continue.
Twin baby girls Cora and Isla Deasy born during Storm Emma at Cork University Maternity Hospital. •
A free skin cancer screening day was held in the South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital in May.
Skin cancer is the most common cancer in Ireland and early detection is essential in its successful treatment.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital commenced a criteria led discharge process to assist in the discharge of patients from inpatient hospital care, addressing key challenges relating to quality and safety issues for patients.
The Pulmonary Rehabilitation project at South Tipperary General Hospital was shortlisted in three categories at the Irish Healthcare Awards.
Pulmonary rehabilitation is an evidence-based, multi-disciplinary intervention for patients with chronic respiratory disease, with over 500 patients completing the programme since its establishment.
All pregnant women in the South/South West Hospital Group will now have equal access to a mid-trimester foetal anatomy scan, carried out between 21-23 weeks.
Four maternity units are in operation within the Hospital Group.
University Hospital Kerry has been named as the flagship hospital for the new hospital Theatre Quality Improvement Programme.
The programme will increase access to theatres for patients.
Hospital Groups
UL Hospitals Group • • •
Croom Orthopaedic Hospital
Ennis Hospital
Nenagh Hospital
St. John’s Hospital
University Hospital Limerick
University Maternity Hospital Limerick
University of Limerick
A reunion with a difference took place at Limerick’s Dreamland recently with a party for premature babies delivered at University Maternity Hospital Limerick.
The ‘Prem Party’ event reunited children who have graduated from the Neonatal Unit at the hospital.
Triplets Courtney, Brooke and Alanna Martin, aged 3, at the Prem Party.
A number of free public lectures took place as part of UL Hospitals Healthy Ireland programme.
These included sessions on: –
how to look after your heart health
water immersion for labour.
A new acute surgical assessment unit opened at University Hospital Limerick, providing an improved clinical environment for patients and laying the foundations for an expanded service in the future.
This allows for shorter waiting times, reduced overall length of stay and a reduction in inappropriate admissions, together with minimal patient discomfort and priority access for certain diagnostic imaging.
A new medical social work walk-in clinic opened at University Maternity Hospital Limerick.
Prior to this, women or their families seeking the support of medical social work within UL Hospitals Group had to be referred by a healthcare professional.
The walk-in clinic will also provide information from other relevant agencies.
Patients and staff at Croom Orthopaedic Hospital are set to benefit from being included in the Irish National Orthopaedic Register (INOR).
INOR collects information electronically at pre-operative, surgical and post-operative assessment stages, from patients who are undergoing joint replacement surgery.
This supports early detection of implant performance and improves the efficiency of the review process.
Croom is the largest site to date and the third hospital in Ireland to go-live with the register.
Nenagh Hospital was unveiled as a national centre of excellence for cataract surgery.
All suitable cataract surgery within UL Hospitals Group is to migrate to the new theatres at Nenagh.
A befriending programme was introduced in Nenagh Hospital with trained volunteers giving their time to provide informal support and encouragement to patients.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Delivering safe quality health services relies not only on frontline services but also on those key enablers that ensure the services our population depend on can function effectively.
These support services include National Human Resources, National Finance, the Office of the Chief Information Officer, Health Business Services, National Communications, Emergency Management and Internal Audit.
National Human Resources
Providing strategic support, direction, advice and interventions to all areas of the health service, through the Health Services People Strategy 2015-2018, recognising that our staff are key to the delivery of safe, efficient and effective services.
National Finance
Supporting the organisation to secure and account for the maximum appropriate investment in our health services, to ensure the delivery of high quality services and demonstrate value for money.
Office of the Chief Information Officer Implementing the eHealth Ireland Strategy which is focused on improving population wellbeing, health service efficiency and economic opportunity through the use of technology.
Health Business Services
Providing a range of business services, including procurement, finance, human resources, estates, HR/ payroll systems and analytics, and business excellence and innovation, on a shared basis to our corporate partners and customers, supporting health structures as they continue to evolve and mature.
National Communications
Supporting people to manage their health and use the best health services for them, and making information about health services more widely accessible to the population.
Emergency Management
Working with services across the organisation to provide advice and support in the preparation of emergency plans, and working on an interagency, interdepartmental and cross border basis in the planning and response phase of emergency planning.
Internal Audit
Identifying risks and control issues, and providing assurance on the adequacy and degree of adherence to our procedures and processes.
In conjunction with frontline services, the provision of a compassionate and efficient healthcare system is dependent on having these key enabling support services in place.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Some activity undertaken within enabling healthcare delivery in 2018…
staff and eHealth systems and upgrades went live
pensioners paid
ICT projects supported
media queries answered
press releases sent
electronic referrals processed
media interviews arranged
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
History was made when more than 50 staff from across the health service marched this year in the Dublin Pride Parade.
Participation in the parade was organised by the Health Services LGBTI+ and Allies Network, in line with the organisation’s policy on embracing diversity which is a key priority of the Health Services People Strategy 2015-2018.
National Human Resources •
2018 was the final year of the Health Services People Strategy 2015-2018 which was developed in recognition of the vital role our workforce plays in delivering safer better healthcare.
Further information on its implementation in 2018 can be found in the Building a Better Health Service section of this Annual Report.
Development of a new strategy to further engage, develop and support our workforce is underway.
People’s Needs Defining Change – Health Services Change Guide was developed to guide and support staff at all levels to become change leaders in our health service.
The framework provides practical assistance that can be adapted and applied to different national and local contexts.
Healthcare staff often have to deal with traumatic, adverse or critical incidents in the course of their work.
The Critical Incident Stress Management/Work Positive programme was reviewed, resulting in a joint project between the National Health and Safety function and Employee Assistance Programme to provide both preventative measures and specialised acute emergency mental health interventions in the aftermath of such an incident.
The Workplace Health and Wellbeing Unit participated in the 32nd International Congress on Occupational Health in March.
The theme of this year’s conference was Linking Research to Practice and the conference provided the opportunity to examine how work in the Irish health service compared with international projects.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
A number of learning and self-development programmes were made available throughout the country.
These included Corporate Induction programmes, First Time Manager’s programmes, People Management the Legal Framework, Leaders in Management, Coaching Skills for Managers, Clerical and Administration Officer Development programmes, Mid-Career and Retirement Planning seminars, together with an accredited national coaching service for staff.
In addition, numerous team development initiatives have been undertaken across the health service which are aimed at systemically improving team effectiveness.
National Finance •
Implementation of the activity-based funding (ABF) model progressed with 39 hospitals now participating in the funding process.
Development of the community costing programme progressed with the commencement of a high level review of disability services expenditure and work continued on the calculation of unit costs in relation to mental health services.
A work plan is in place for the Pay Foundation Programme, to improve the costing, reporting, forecasting and planning of pay across the health service.
To improve confidence and capability for staff across the health service in working with financial reports and documentation, a Finance training hub was developed and is available on the HSELanD share centre.
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Our staff commitment to patient care during Storm Emma
Two paramedics delivered a healthy baby girl on the side of a Kilkenny road after the ambulance her mother was travelling in got stuck in snow.
Staff from Regional Hospital Mullingar making their way into work through Storm Emma.
Staff from St Mary’s Hospital in the Phoenix Park who braved the weather to make sure residents were well looked after.
Annie, a Public Health Nurse in Donegal, getting a lift from her nephew Liam to ensure that she reached all her patients.
Local residents in Tallaght assisting NAS retrieve a Rapid Response Vehicle that got stuck in the snow.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
The Healthmail service, used by GPs, GP support staff and pharmacists to send correspondence, including clinical patient information, electronically in a secure manner, has been rolled out as a service for optometrists to allow documents and images to be attached for timely and secure transfer.
The number of eReferrals continued to grow.
By year end, eReferrals represented 31.7% of all referrals for outpatient services (17,029 referrals in December 2018).
Following significant work on the design and build of a National Cancer Information System to support the shared medical oncology care delivery model, implementation began on a phased basis across the 26 systemic anti-cancer therapy (SACT) sites.
St. Luke’s Hospital, Rathgar is the first site due to go live in 2019.
The maternal and newborn clinical management system (MN CMS) went live in the National Maternity Hospital completing phase 1 of the system’s implementation.
The system allows information to be shared with relevant healthcare providers as and when required.
The individual health identifier (IHI) has been seeded into several health service systems including PCRS, as well as into 22 volunteer GP practices.
This improves patient safety by ensuring patients are identified accurately.
The systems for the new children’s hospital paediatric outpatient and urgent care centres are well advanced supporting a 2019 go-live.
These systems support and enable the delivery of paediatric care as part of an integrated clinical network.
35 hospitals have been supported in monitoring key unscheduled care metrics through the development of real time dashboards, allowing these metrics to be embedded in operational and strategic decisionmaking.
As part of the move to a national electronic laboratory record, the MedLIS project has continued incorporating national guidelines into its design and the system testing phase has been completed.
The IHI interface specifications have been agreed and a data protection impact assessment has been completed for General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) compliance.
The National Integrated Medical Imaging System (NIMIS) is reaching the end of its current implementation phase.
Implementation commenced in Children’s University Hospital (Temple St.) in October and a number of new services went live on existing NIMIS sites, including the vascular ultrasound department in University Hospital Limerick.
The Open Health Data Portal is available at http://data.ehealthireland.ie/ making it easy to find and access data from across the health service, including information on available health services, statistics on hospital cases and national waiting lists, and performance of new digital initiatives, such as eReferrals.
380 datasets are now available to view.
Finance Reform Programme
Established to deliver the phased implementation of a new Finance Operating Model for the Irish health service, the Finance Reform Programme is considered to be one of the key non-clinical priorities of the organisation.
A core element of the programme is the design and implementation of a single integrated financial and procurement system (IFMS) for the Irish Health Services.
This system will be based on the modern SAP S/4 HANA platform and will support our services in their efforts to deliver and demonstrate value for patients and their families.
• The single instance interim SAP solution was extended to its first voluntary site with the go-live in Crumlin Hospital.
• The procurement process for an external partner to support systems integration and change was commenced.
Technology Office
The Chief Information Officer •
Work continued on the development of plans to deliver the electronic health record (EHR) which has been identified as a key requirement for the future delivery of healthcare and is the cornerstone of the eHealth Ireland Strategy.
The acute EHR business case has been developed and the approval process is being worked through with the relevant government departments.
The One Programme is continuing to work towards creating a single platform for the delivery of all digital services for HSE staff.
3,200 existing staff have been migrated to the new HealthIrl domain and all new staff will be set up there.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
In the development of the health service’s Cloud First Digital Strategy, key principles have been agreed and are in place.
These include the requirement for Cloud Solutions to have a business owner, be subject to risk assessment, follow the standard Office of the Chief Information Officer (OoCIO) business case approval process and comply with HSE policies and standards.
Work to improve governance of the strategy has also continued with a risk assessment template created and piloted in University Hospital Limerick and the procurement process for the required infrastructure and platform commenced.
A number of workshops were held in advance of the GDPR implementation date to assist in providing guidance and direction on compliance.
The supplier confidentiality agreement was also updated to incorporate GDPR regulations.
The ePrescribing pilot continued with total medical card prescriptions exceeding 200,000 by year end.
Work also commenced on the Falsified Medicines Directive (FMD) project to enable the decommissioning and verification of medicines on hospital and community sites.
Both initiatives are utilising digital solutions to ensure safer, more efficient ePharmacy delivery.
Health Business Services •
A national integrated staff records and pay (NiSRP) programme was established which aims to implement a single system with streamlined business processes for staff records and payroll services.
It will also introduce a self-service option and provide improved data in terms of payroll expenditure.
To provide for necessary upgrades to payroll systems, the first phase of the Payroll Stabilisation Project was implemented in the North East, with more than 10,000 employees and pensioners migrated to a new payroll software solution.
Phase 2 of the project will commence in early 2019.
In order to provide a more resilient systems environment for critical HSE functions and eliminate a number of existing risks, the Health Business Services (HBS) HR/ Payroll Systems Transition Programme completed the upgrade and migration of SAP® HR, Payroll, Business Warehouse and a number of finance systems to a new state of the art solution.
In September, the first Joint Digital Collaborathon was hosted by HBS with Business Shared Services from Health and Social Care Northern Ireland, and Ervia (formerly Bord Gáis) in the Trinity Innovation Centre.
In the weeks running up to the event, the three organisations brought forward three challenges each that they were facing in their digital journeys, and set these out in a series of animations and fact files that were shared with the 140 attendees.
Those at the event were able to select which challenge they took on and each organisation has agreed to take back the three solutions proposed for each of their challenges and to look at them in more detail.
Planning for next year’s event is already underway.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
Capital projects completed during the year
Grangegorman Primary Care Centre
HBS Digital Programme –
The digitisation of personnel files is one of the single biggest enablers for many of the HBS strategic programmes.
A total of 75% (71,000) of staff records have now been digitised.
A digital solution to manage the health estate was progressed.
When fully implemented, the National Estates ICT System will include a property database, and a project management system incorporating workflow and document management and facilities management.
The concepts and tools of LEAN were introduced into HBS to improve the quality of services, generate cost savings and remove unnecessary non-value adding activities.
Staff took on projects to find and eliminate waste using Lean tools.
28 successful participants on the Yellow Belt programme and seven on the Green Belt programme were accredited by the University of Limerick.
Many benefits have been achieved through the first cohort of projects, with verified savings or cost avoidance in the region of €665,000.
Mental Health Unit, University Hospital Galway
Kilcock Primary Care Centre
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018 •
National Rehabilitation Hospital
402 POU locations are now in place. •
Radiation oncology programme facilities
National Forensic Mental Health Service Hospital
National Maternity Hospital
Primary care centres
Social care residential programme housing.
Enabling Healthcare Delivery
National Communications
Internal Audit
160 audit reports were issued including 37 reports in respect of HSE funded agencies and ten reports in respect of TUSLA. –
Special investigations were undertaken, in the areas of procurement, clients’ money and proposed sale of land.
The implementation of audit recommendations, contained in internal audit reports issued in 2018 and prior years, was monitored and reported on.
Advice and guidance on controls and processes was provided to senior management.
Development commenced of a three year Internal Audit Strategy.
A pilot project between UL Hospitals Group and Mid West Community Healthcare commenced to create a complete geographical list of information on health and social care services available in the area.
This project is being run in collaboration with the OoCIO with the aim of subsequently rolling it out nationwide.
Easy to understand guides are being developed in association with mental health services on conditions and services, how to access these services and what you can expect from them.
HSELive was present at the 2018 Ploughing Championships to provide information to visitors about how to access various health services, who qualifies for health services and where to find information about health.
Information material was distributed about the various ways of contacting HSELive – through telephone, live chat, email and Twitter.
In March, during Storm Emma, HSE social media was a leading source of information for patients, service users, their families and staff.
Posts in relation to Storm Emma were seen by almost one million people.
Emergency Management •
External emergency plans for top tier Seveso (hazardous material) sites were reviewed, updated and tested in compliance with legislation.
In March, Ireland was impacted by Storm Emma, an event which resulted in wide scale disruption of transport infrastructure.
The national crisis management team and seven area crisis management teams were supported by Emergency Management Services in their implementation of plans to mitigate the disruption caused by the storm on the delivery of patient care.
In co-operation with the national clinical advisor and the acute hospitals, a draft mass casualty incident framework for the greater Dublin area was prepared.
Training continued as part of interagency responsibilities as set out in A Framework for Major Emergency Management, including leading the HSE element of Operation Barracuda, a mass casualty exercise-based on the scenario of a terrorist attack within a crowded place.
Emergency Management Services led on the planning and delivery of the healthcare element of the Papal visit to Ireland, the largest crowd event in Ireland in 2018.
Appendix 1: Membership of the Directorate and Leadership Team
Directorate Members as at 31 December 2018: •
Ms Anne O’Connor (Director General/Chairperson)
Dr Colm Henry (Chief Clinical Officer)
Ms Rosarii Mannion (National Director, Human Resources)
Mr Stephen Mulvany (Chief Financial Officer and Deputy Director General)
Mr Dean Sullivan (Chief Strategy and Planning Officer and Deputy Director General)
Leadership Team as at 31 December 2018:
Ms Anne O’Connor (Director General/Chairperson)
Ms Jane Carolan (National Director, Health Business Services)
Dr Jerome Coffey (National Director, National Cancer Control Programme)
Dr Paul Connors (National Director, Communications)
Dr Philip Crowley (National Director, Quality Improvement)
Mr Martin Curley (Chief Information Officer)
Ms Angela Fitzgerald (National Director, Acute Operations)
Mr Pat Healy (National Director, Community Strategy and Planning)
Mr John Hennessy (National Director, Acute Strategy and Planning)
Dr Colm Henry (Chief Clinical Officer)
Dr Stephanie O’Keeffe (National Director, Strategic Planning and Transformation)
Mr Patrick Lynch (National Director, Quality Assurance and Verification)
Ms Rosarii Mannion (National Director, Human Resources)
Mr Damien McCallion (National Director, Screening Services and CAWT)
Mr Stephen Mulvany (Chief Financial Officer and Deputy Director General)
Mr Joe Ryan (National Director, National Services (including VIP and GDPR))
Dr Geraldine Smith (National Director, Internal Audit)
Mr Dean Sullivan (Chief Strategy and Planning Officer and Deputy Director General)
Mr David Walsh (National Director, Community Operations)
Mr Liam Woods (Chief Operations Officer and Deputy Director General)
Mr Jim O’Sullivan (Director, Corporate Governance and Corporate Secretary)
National Director Quality Improvement
National Director Screening Services and CAWT
National Director Health Business Services
Chief Information Officer
Cancer Control Programme
Chief Clinical National Director
National Services (including VIP and GDPR)
Chief Financial Officer and Deputy Director General
Standing Committee of the Directorate
• Risk Committee
Appendix 2: Organisational Structure
National Director Community Strategy and Planning
National Director Strategic Planning and Transformation
National Director Communications
Director Corporate Governance and Corporate Secretary
National Director Internal Audit
HSE Leadership Team
% of internal audit recommendations implemented within six months of the report being received
% of internal audit recommendations implemented, against total no. of recommendations, within 12 months of report being received
% of number of service arrangements signed
% of the monetary value of service arrangements signed
% annual compliance statements signed
% BreastCheck screening uptake rate
% of women offered hospital admission for treatment within three weeks of diagnosis of breast cancer
No. of Diabetic RetinaScreen clients screened with final grading result
Quality and Safety
Service User Experience
% of complaints investigated within 30 working days of being acknowledged by the complaints officer Serious Incidents
Incident Reporting
National Screening Service
Health and Wellbeing
No. of women in the eligible population who have had a complete mammogram
No. of clients who have completed a satisfactory BowelScreen FIT test
% of client uptake rate in the BowelScreen programme
Diabetic RetinaScreen
No. of test purchases carried out under the Public Health (Sunbeds) Act 2014
No. of mystery shopper inspections carried out under the Public Health (Sunbeds) Act 2014
No. of smokers who received intensive cessation support from a cessation counsellor
% of smokers on cessation programmes who were quit at one month
% of children aged 24 months who have received three doses of the 6 in 1 vaccine
% of children aged 24 months who have received the measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine
% of first year girls who have received two doses of HPV vaccine
% of healthcare workers who have received seasonal Flu vaccine in the 2017-2018 influenza season (acute hospitals)
% of healthcare workers who have received seasonal Flu vaccine in the 2017-2018 influenza season (long term care facilities in the community)
% uptake in Flu vaccine for those aged 65 and older with a medical card or GP visit card
No. of frontline staff to complete the online Making Every Contact Count training in brief intervention
No. of frontline staff to complete the face to face module of Making Every Contact Count training in brief intervention
No. of establishments receiving a planned inspection under the Public Health (Sunbeds) Act 2014 No. of official food control planned, and planned surveillance, inspections of food businesses.
No. of inspections of e-cigarette and refill container manufacturers, importers, distributors and retailers under E.U. (Manufacture, Presentation and Sale of Tobacco and Related Products) Regulations 2016
Health and Wellbeing
Tobacco
Chronic Disease Management
No. of people who have completed a structured patient education programme for diabetes Immunisations and Vaccines
Public Health
No. of infectious disease (ID) outbreaks notified under the national ID reporting schedule Making Every Contact Count
Primary Care Services
Community Intervention Teams
No. of referrals
Health Amendment Act: Services to persons with State Acquired Hepatitis C
No. of Health Amendment Act card holders who were reviewed
Healthcare Associated Infections: Medication Management Consumption of antibiotics in community settings (defined daily doses per 1,000 population)
GP Activity
No. of contacts with GP Out of Hours Service
* Change to NSP 2018 target due to activity associated with the expansion of structured GP out of hours provision in Community Healthcare East Nursing
Community Healthcare
No. of patients seen
% of new patients seen for assessment within 12 weeks
% on waiting list for assessment ≤52 weeks
% of new service users seen for assessment within 12 weeks
% on waiting list for assessment ≤52 weeks
% on waiting list for assessment ≤52 weeks
% on waiting list for treatment ≤52 weeks
No. of patients seen
% on waiting list for treatment ≤12 weeks
% on waiting list for treatment ≤52 weeks
No. of patients seen
% on waiting list for treatment ≤12 weeks
% on waiting list for treatment ≤52 weeks
% of new patients accepted onto the nursing caseload and seen within 12 weeks Therapies/Community
Healthcare Network Services
Total no. of patients seen
Physiotherapy
Occupational Therapy
Speech and Language Therapy
Podiatry
Ophthalmology
% on waiting list for treatment ≤12 weeks
% on waiting list for treatment ≤52 weeks
No. of patients seen
% on waiting list for treatment ≤12 weeks
% on waiting list for treatment ≤52 weeks
No. of patients seen
% on waiting list for treatment ≤12 weeks
% on waiting list for treatment ≤52 weeks
% of children reaching 10 months within the reporting period who have had child development health screening on time or before reaching 10 months of age
% of newborn babies visited by a PHN within 72 hours of discharge from maternity services
% of babies breastfed (exclusively and not exclusively) at first PHN visit
Audiology
Dietetics
Psychology
Oral Health % of new patients who commenced treatment within three months of scheduled oral health assessment
Community Healthcare
Orthodontics
No. and % of patients seen for assessment within six months
Reduce the proportion of patients (grades 4 and 5) on the treatment waiting list waiting longer than four years Paediatric Homecare Packages
No. of packages GP Trainees
No. of trainees
National Virus Reference Laboratory No. of tests
Child Health
% of babies breastfed exclusively at first PHN visit % of babies breastfed (exclusively and not exclusively) at three month PHN visit % of babies breastfed exclusively at three month PHN visit Social Inclusion Services
Opioid Substitution
Average waiting time from opioid substitution assessment to exit from waiting list or treatment commenced
No. of service users admitted to homeless emergency accommodation hostels/facilities whose health needs have been assessed within two weeks of admission
% of service users admitted to homeless emergency accommodation hostels/facilities whose health needs have been assessed within two weeks of admission
No. of people who received information on type 2 diabetes or participated in related initiatives
No. of people who received information on cardiovascular health or participated in related initiatives
No. and % of substance misusers (over 18 years) for whom treatment has commenced within one calendar month following assessment
No. and % of substance misusers (under 18 years) for whom treatment has commenced within one week following assessment
Access to specialist inpatient bed within seven days
% of patients triaged within one working day of referral (inpatient unit)
% of patients with a multi-disciplinary care plan documented within five working days of initial assessment (inpatient unit)
Access to specialist palliative care services in the community provided within seven days (normal place of residence)
% of patients triaged within one working day of referral (community)
Needle Exchange
No. of unique individuals attending pharmacy needle exchange
Homeless Services
Traveller Health
Community Healthcare
Substance Misuse
Palliative Care Services
Inpatient Palliative Care Services No. accessing specialist inpatient beds within seven days (during the reporting month) Community Palliative Care Services
Children’s Palliative Care Services No. of children in the care of the Clinical Nurse Co-ordinator for Children with Life Limiting Conditions (children’s outreach nurse)
No. of children in the care of the acute specialist paediatric palliative care team (during the reporting month)
% of completed medical card/GP visit card applications processed within 15 days
% of medical card/GP visit card applications, assigned for medical officer review, processed within five days
% of medical card/GP visit card applications which are accurately processed from a financial perspective by National Medical Card Unit staff
Total no. of items prescribed
No. of prescriptions
No. of claims
Total no. of items prescribed
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks/three months by General Adult Community Mental Health Team
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks/three months by General Adult Community Mental Health Team
% of new (including re-referred) General Adult Community Mental Health Team cases offered appointment and DNA in the current month
No. of adult referrals seen by mental health services
No. of admissions to adult acute inpatient units
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks/three months by Psychiatry of Later Life Community Mental Health Teams
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks/three months by Psychiatry of Later Life Community Mental Health Teams
% of new (including re-referred) Psychiatry of Later Life Psychiatry Team cases offered appointment and DNA in the current month
No. of Psychiatry of Later Life referrals seen by mental health services
Admissions of children to Child and Adolescent Acute Inpatient Units as a % of the total no. of admissions of children to mental health acute inpatient units
% of bed days used in HSE Child and Adolescent Acute Inpatient Units as a total of bed days used by children in mental health acute inpatient units
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks/three months by Child and Adolescent Community Mental Health Teams
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks/three months by Child and Adolescent Community Mental Health Teams
% of new (including re-referred) child/adolescent referrals offered appointment and DNA in the current month
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals seen within 12 months by Child and Adolescent Community Mental Health Teams excluding DNAs
No. of CAMHs referrals received by mental health services
No. of CAMHs referrals seen by mental health services
% of preliminary screenings for adults aged 65 years and over with an outcome of reasonable grounds for concern that are submitted to the safeguarding and protection teams accompanied by an interim safeguarding plan
% of preliminary screenings for adults under 65 years with an outcome of reasonable grounds for concern that are submitted to the safeguarding and protection teams accompanied by an interim safeguarding plan
Community Healthcare
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
Disability and Older Persons’ Services Safeguarding
Disability Services
Quality % of compliance with regulations following HIQA inspection of disability residential services Residential Places
No. of residential places for people with a disability
New Emergency Places and Supports Provided to People with a Disability No. of new emergency places provided to people with a disability
No. of new home supports for emergency cases
No. of in home respite supports for emergency cases Total no. of new Emergency and Support Places
No. of people with a disability in receipt of work/worklike activity services (ID/autism and physical and sensory disability)
No. of people (all disabilities) in receipt of rehabilitation training (RT)
No. of people with a disability in receipt of other day services (excl. RT and work/work-like activities) (adult) (ID/ autism and physical and sensory disability)
% of school leavers and rehabilitation training (RT) graduates who have been provided with a placement
One additional respite house in each of the nine CHO areas – no. of individuals supported
Three additional respite houses in the greater Dublin Region – no. of individuals supported
Alternative models of respite provision including Home Sharing, Saturday Club, Extended Day – no. of individuals supported
No. of PA service hours delivered to adults with a physical and/or sensory disability
No. of adults with a physical and/or sensory disability in receipt of a PA service
No. of home support hours delivered to persons with a disability
No. of people with a disability in receipt of home support services (ID/autism and physical and sensory disability)
Transforming Lives – VfM Policy Review Deliver on VfM implementation priorities Congregated Settings
Facilitate the movement of people from congregated to community settings
Community Healthcare
Day Services including School Leavers
Respite Services
No. of day only respite sessions accessed by people with a disability
No. of overnights (with or without day respite) accessed by people with a disability
No. of people with a disability in receipt of respite services (ID/autism and physical and sensory disability)
Personal Assistance (PA)
Progressing Disability Services for Children and Young People (0-18s) Programme No. of Children’s Disability Network Teams established % of Children’s Disability Network Teams established
* The 2018 target of 129 teams was subject to change due to further development of Progressing Disability Services implementation plans, bringing the revised target to 138 teams.
56 teams were previously established leaving an active target of 82 teams for 2018.
Service Improvement Team Process Deliver on service improvement priorities
% of compliance with regulations following HIQA inspection of HSE direct-provided Older Persons’ Residential Services
% of CHO quality and safety committees, with responsibilities to include governance of the quality and safety of Older Persons’ Services who have met in this reporting month
No. of home support hours provided (excluding provision of hours from Intensive Home Care Packages (IHCPs))
No. of people in receipt of home support (excluding provision from Intensive Home Care Packages (IHCPs)) – each person counted once only
No. of NHSS beds in public long stay units
No. of short stay beds in public long stay units
% of population over 65 years in NHSS funded beds (based on 2016 Census figures)
% of clients with NHSS who are in receipt of ancillary state support
% of clients who have Common Summary Assessment Reports (CSARs) processed within six weeks
Older Persons’ Services
Quality Community Healthcare
% of CHOs who have established a Residents’ Council/ Family Forum/Service User Panel or equivalent for Older Persons’ Services Home Support
Intensive Homecare Packages (IHCPs) Total no. of persons in receipt of an Intensive Home Care Package
No. of home support hours provided from Intensive Home Care Packages % of clients in receipt of an IHCP with a key worker assigned
Transitional Care
No. of people at any given time being supported through transitional care in alternative care settings
No. of persons in acute hospitals approved for transitional care to move to alternative care settings Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS)
Service Improvement Team Process
Deliver on service improvement priorities
Day case (includes dialysis)
Total inpatient and day cases
Inpatient discharges ≥75 years
Day case discharges ≥75 years
Return ED attendances
Other emergency presentations
% of adults waiting <15 months for an elective procedure (inpatient)
% of adults waiting <15 months for an elective procedure (day case)
% of children waiting <15 months for an elective procedure (inpatient)
% of children waiting <15 months for an elective procedure (day case)
% of people waiting <52 weeks for first access to OPD services
Discharge Activity Inpatient Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
% of all attendees at ED who are discharged or admitted within six hours of registration
% of all attendees at ED who are discharged or admitted within nine hours of registration
% of all attendees at ED who are in ED <24 hours
% of all attendees aged 75 years and over at ED who are discharged or admitted within six hours of registration
% of all attendees aged 75 years and over at ED who are discharged or admitted within nine hours of registration
% of all attendees aged 75 years and over at ED who are discharged or admitted within 24 hours of registration
% of medical patients who are discharged or admitted from AMAU within six hours AMAU registration
% of all medical admissions via AMAU
% of emergency re-admissions for acute medical conditions to the same hospital within 30 days of discharge
% of elective surgical inpatients who had principal procedure conducted on day of admission
% day case rate for Elective Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy
% of emergency hip fracture surgery carried out within 48 hours
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
Emergency Care and Patient Experience Time
% of ED patients who leave before completion of treatment Ambulance Turnaround Times
% of ambulances that have a time interval of ≤ 60 minutes from arrival at ED to when the ambulance crew declares the readiness of the ambulance to accept another call (clear and available)
Length of Stay
ALOS for all inpatient discharges excluding LOS over 30 days
Medical
Medical patient average length of stay
Surgery
Surgical patient average length of stay
No. of bed days lost through delayed discharges
No. of beds subject to delayed discharges
Rate of new cases of hospital acquired Staph. Aureus bloodstream infection
<1/10,000 bed days used
Rate of new cases of hospital acquired C. difficile infection
<2/10,000 bed days used
No. of new cases of CPE
% of acute hospitals implementing the requirements for screening of patients with CPE guidelines
% of acute hospitals implementing the national policy on restricted anti-microbial agents
Data available by clinical condition
% of hospitals who have completed second assessment against the NSSBH
% of acute hospitals which have completed and published monthly hospital patient safety indicator report
No. of patients triaged as urgent presenting to symptomatic breast clinics
No. of attendances whose referrals were triaged as urgent by the cancer centre and adhered to the national standard of two weeks for urgent referrals
% of attendances whose referrals were triaged as urgent by the cancer centre and adhered to the national standard of two weeks for urgent referrals
No. of non-urgent attendances presenting to symptomatic breast clinics
No. of attendances whose referrals were triaged as non-urgent by the cancer centre and adhered to the national standard of 12 weeks for non-urgent referrals (No. offered an appointment that falls within 12 weeks)
% of attendances whose referrals were triaged as non-urgent by the cancer centre and adhered to the national standard of 12 weeks for non-urgent referrals (% offered an appointment that falls within 12 weeks)
Acute Coronary Syndrome National Women and Infants Health Programme Irish Maternity Early Warning Score (IMEWS) % of maternity units/hospitals with full implementation of IMEWS
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
% of hospitals with implementation of IMEWS Clinical Guidelines % of maternity units/hospitals with an implementation plan for the guideline for clinical handover in maternity services % maternity hospitals/units which have completed and published Maternity Patient Safety Statement and discussed same at hospital management team/ Hospital Group/NWIHP meetings each month
Cancer Services
Symptomatic Breast Cancer Services Urgent
Symptomatic Breast Cancer Services Non-urgent
Clinical Detection Rate
No. of new attendances to clinic, triaged as urgent, which have a subsequent primary diagnosis of breast cancer
* The target identified in NSP2018 referred to a minimum diagnostic threshold, that is, the least expected number of patients attending clinics who are subsequently diagnosed with cancer.
% of new attendances to clinic, triaged as urgent, that have a subsequent primary diagnosis of breast cancer
No. of patients attending the rapid access lung clinic in designated cancer centres
No. of patients attending lung rapid access clinics who attended or were offered an appointment within 10 working days of receipt of referral in designated cancer centres
% of patients attending lung rapid access clinics who attended or were offered an appointment within 10 working days of receipt of referral in designated cancer centres
No. of patients attending the rapid access clinic in cancer centres
No. of patients attending prostate rapid access clinics who attended or were offered an appointment within 20 working days of receipt of referral in the cancer centres
No. of new attendances to clinic that have a subsequent primary diagnosis of prostate cancer
% of new attendances to clinic that have a subsequent primary diagnosis of prostate cancer
No. of patients who completed radical radiotherapy treatment (palliative care patients not included)
No. of patients undergoing radical radiotherapy treatment who commenced treatment within 15 working days of being deemed ready to treat by the radiation oncologist (palliative care patients not included)
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
Lung Cancers
Clinical Detection Rate
Prostate Cancer
Clinical Detection Rate
Radiotherapy
Total no. of AS3 calls (inter-hospital transfers)
No. of clinical status 1 ECHO calls activated
No. of clinical status 1 ECHO calls arrived at scene (excludes those stood down en route)
No. of clinical status 1 DELTA calls activated
No. of clinical status 1 DELTA calls arrived at scene (excludes those stood down en route)
% of clinical status 1 ECHO incidents responded to by a patient-carrying vehicle in 18 minutes and 59 seconds or less
% of ECHO calls which had a resource allocated within 90 seconds of call start
% of clinical status 1 DELTA incidents responded to by a patient-carrying vehicle in 18 minutes and 59 seconds or less
% of DELTA calls which have a resource allocated within 90 seconds of call start
No. of intermediate care vehicle (ICV) transfer calls
% of all transfers provided through the intermediate care service
98.8% (60 minutes only reported)
Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Services
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
Irish Coast Guard – Calls (Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport)
Clinical Outcome
Return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) at hospital in bystander witnessed out of hospital cardiac arrest with initial shockable rhythm, using Utstein comparator group calculation
Audit
National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) Tallaght and Ballyshannon
– % of control centres that carry out Advanced Quality Assurance Audits (AQuA) National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) Tallaght and Ballyshannon
– % medical priority dispatch system (MPDS) protocol compliance Emergency Response Times
Intermediate Care Service
Ambulance Turnaround
% of ambulance turnaround delays escalated where ambulance crews were not cleared nationally (from ambulance arrival time through clinical handover in ED or specialist unit to when the ambulance crew declares readiness of the ambulance to accept another call) in line with the process/flow path in the ambulance turnaround framework within: •­ 30 minutes •­ 60 minutes
Provision of a helipad
Upgrade of hospital-wide fire detection and alarm system and emergency lighting to facilitate current and future developments
Reconfiguration of recently vacated ED to create a medical short stay unit
Phase 1a of the redevelopment of Ennis General Hospital – consists of the fit out of vacated areas in the existing building to accommodate physiotherapy and pharmacy (complete) and the reconfiguration of layouts and the provision of a viewing room.
Radiation oncology
Upgrade of hospital wide fire detection and alarm system and emergency lighting to facilitate current and future developments
Planned Completion Date (as per NSP 2018)
Blood Science Project – extension and refurbishment of existing pathology laboratory to facilitate management services tender
St. John’s Hospital, Limerick
UL Hospitals Group
South Tipperary General Hospital
Cork University Hospital
South/South West Hospital Group
Facility
Pre-Hospital And Acute Hospital Care
Part 2 – Refurbishment of vacated space, support accommodation for 16 single rooms and 4 double rooms (part funded by the Friends of Nenagh Hospital)
Appendix 5: Annual Energy Efficiency Report In response to legislation SI 426 of 2014 (previously SI 542 of 2009), which requires public sector organisations to report annually, this appendix outlines the HSE’s position on its energy use and actions taken to reduce consumption.
In 2013 the National Health Sustainability Office (NHSO) was established within the national Estates function, part of HBS, to develop and build staff, patient and public awareness of sustainability issues, and to deliver lower costs and a healthier environment.
Overview of Energy Usage in 2018
The NHSO is fully compliant with the requirements of SI 426 and has verified all HSE meter points for 2018.
This data is currently being validated by the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) and it is anticipated that this verified energy consumption data will be available from the SEAI in mid-2019. Actions planned for 2019 •
The overview below is the verified energy usage in 2017 (excluding section 38/39 agencies).
The verified 2018 energy usage, when issued by SEAI, will be made available at www.hse.ie/sustainability.
Operating and Financial Overview 2018 Introduction 2018 was in many ways a challenging year for the HSE with significant pressures on acute, community and social care services contributing to a financial overrun by year end.
Despite the challenges faced by the HSE, progress is being made in key areas, which will bring real benefits to our patients and service users.
It has been acknowledged that the current model for healthcare in Ireland is unsustainable and needs to be significantly changed over the medium to long term.
This year saw the publication of the Sláintecare Implementation Strategy, which has provided a framework within which the HSE will focus on transforming health services over the coming decade.
In 2019 we will work with the new Board and Chair to publish a three-year Corporate Plan, aligned to Sláintecare and focused on providing a clear medium-term roadmap for staff, patients, service users and all stakeholders.
also an increasing number of older people presenting with challenges such as disabilities, cognitive loss and chronic disease.
The fact that we are living longer in better health or living longer with chronic disease is partly due to improved treatment of disease combined with other environmental factors.
Presenting with mounting incidence of chronic disease, requiring increasing intervention and followup services.
As people live longer with chronic disease this in turn creates a demand for additional health care services.
As the population ages there is a corresponding increase in chronic disease especially in the cohort who are aged over 50.
It is expected that the number of people in this age cohort living with one or more chronic disease is expected to increase by 40% based on 2016 levels by 2030.3
Presenting with healthcare needs driven by lifestyle factors including smoking, excessive alcohol consumption and obesity.
There are almost 1.7 million adults in Ireland who are overweight or obese and 5% of Irish adults suffer from type 2 diabetes.
The HSE has put in place programmes to deal with these challenges, for example, it has been reported that the prevalence of smoking has declined from 23% in 2015 to 20% in 2018.4
Presenting with healthcare needs arising from societal change, there is a strong link between poverty, socio-economic status and health.
The key elements of the HSE’s 2018 financial performance are summarised under the following headings: Strategic Context; Financial Overview; Income Analysis; Outturn 2018 By Service Areas; Finance-Related Initiatives And Outlook For 2019.
Strategic Context
Annually the HSE is required to prioritise safe services within the resources available to it and deliver the type and volume of services provided for in the national service plan while seeking to sustainably improve the quality of services.
Additional challenges experienced by the HSE during 2018 included: •
Staffing challenges both in terms of the difficulties in recruiting and retaining certain specialist healthcare staff, in the context of a global shortage of healthcare staff, and also the challenge to respond to service demands while seeking to keep our mix and number of staff within what is affordable.
Impact of major adverse weather conditions such as Storm Emma put significant pressure on our services which had to deal with a rise in unscheduled care admissions, as well as the challenge of ensuring safe access for patients and staff alike.
Our staff responded exceptionally well to this challenge.
In that context it is important to note the increasingly complex service demands and pressures arising from a population that is: •
Growing in numbers.
According to the Central Statistics Office (CSO), the population of Ireland, in the year to April 2018, grew by the single largest amount over a 12 month period since 2008.1 The ERSI2 projects that the population will continue to increase by up to 23% between now and 2030 adding up to another 1.1 million people requiring the services of the HSE.
• Living longer.
Life expectancy in Ireland has risen and the ESRI has indicated that by 2030 the share of the population aged 65 and over will increase from 1 in 8 to 1 in 6, and that the current number of people who are 85 and over is expected to double.
• Issues related to the cervical screening programme have impacted on those who use this service, on the staff in the programme and more generally on senior clinical and management capacity.
CSO Population and Migration Estimates April 2018.
ESRI Report, Projections of demand for healthcare in Ireland 2015-2030. 4 HSE National Service Plan 2019.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Preparing for Brexit.
The HSE has in place a steering group who are preparing the HSE for the impact of the UK's withdrawal from the European Union.
The HSE is fully supportive of the need to make significant changes to the current unsustainable models of healthcare and is committed to working with the Sláintecare Programme to deliver this change.
The Sláintecare Report acknowledges that in order to achieve the best outcomes for our population, safe, quality services must be provided in an integrated way, where and when they are needed.
Improved geographic alignment between the services currently provided by the Hospital Groups and CHOs is a key recommendation of the report.
It is expected that the design of revised structures, built around integrated care organisations, will be progressed in 2019. Hospital Groups Financial Overview
There are currently seven Hospital Groups responsible for the delivery of hospital services.
These Hospital Groups allow a co-ordinated approach to both the planning and delivery of acute care. The Acute Hospital sector including the National Ambulance Service accounts for almost 39% of overall HSE expenditure.
This is in recognition of the challenges faced in providing hospital services in the context of an ageing population, with a significant increase in the presentation of chronic illness, as well as the impact of lifestyle choices on the health of the Irish population.
At the start of 2018, via the National Service Plan, the HSE received revenue funding of €14.6 billion for the provision of health and social care services.
This represented an increase of circa €0.4 billion or 2.8% over the 2017 final allocation.
Transformation
Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs) There are currently nine regional Community Healthcare Organisations responsible for the local delivery of community health services including primary care, social inclusion, older persons’ services, palliative care, mental health and disability services.
These services represent 51% of overall HSE expenditure.
By the end of 2018 the financial statements show a final revenue allocation of €15.2 billion.
This final budget includes the receipt of €625m of additional recurring revenue funding provided by way of a supplementary estimate for 2018.
The Letter of Determination received on the 23 October indicated that of the additional funding received, €50m was available for PCRS, €46m for State Claims Agency, €90m for 2017 First Charge6 , €76m for Acute services and €73m for Community.
€85m was also made available for a shortfall on Acute income in addition to €150m technical adjustment and €55m for a range of other support service areas.
Table 5 illustrates the 2018 and 2017 outturn for each respective service area and compares the growth year on year.
This is expanded under each service area narrative, further in this document.
Division
Acute Hospitals
Primary Care
Social Care
Corporate Support Services
Mental Health
Health and Wellbeing
ESRI Report.
As required by legislation, provision was made in 2018 for the revenue deficit brought forward from the end of 2017.
Financial Governance
Income Analysis
The HSE delivers a range of health and social care services using financial resources allocated by the DoH as well as utilising income raised by private patient income, superannuation income, pension levy deductions from staff and pharmaceutical rebates.
Table 6 provides an analysis of this income.
“First Charge”
Patient Income
Superannuation Income
Pension Levy Deductions
Other Income
Department of Health Grant
Total Income per AFS
The income graph below shows that in recent years the HSE’s income levels have started to recover from the drop in funding arising from the economic downturn.
Acute Hospitals Services
Acute services include emergency care, urgent care, short term stabilisation, scheduled care, trauma, acute surgery, and ambulance services as well as critical care and pre-hospital care for adults and children.
Hospitals continually work to improve access to both scheduled and unscheduled care and to maximise the provision of safe, quality services within the allocated budget.
The seven Hospital Groups provide the structure to deliver an integrated hospital network of acute care in each geographic area.
Linear (DOH Grant €bn)
The final outturn for Acute Hospital Services in 2018 was €6,299m after a challenging year impacted by reduced income from hospital private maintenance changes, increased impact of bad debt provisioning as well as additional expenditure arising from required operational services and increases in clinical non pay.
Despite the impact of Storm Emma, activity delivery in most areas was higher than the targets set out in NSP 2018, in terms of both activity volume and overall complexity.
The higher than expected operational costs experienced is a direct consequence of this enhanced level of service delivery.
Financial Governance
Social Care – comprising Disability and Older Persons Services
The challenge in 2018 for Disability and Older Persons’ Services was to continue to meet the rising demand for services as a result of an ageing population with a longer life expectancy.
The change in demographics in Ireland has meant that the health service has to adapt to the changing needs of its service users and patients including providing services for an increasing number of people with a disability or multiple illnesses requiring more complex service requirements. The final outturn for Disability and Older Persons’ Services in 2018 was €3,264m, which after the application of additional supplementary funding meant that costs in this service area were broadly in line with available funding.
HIQA has advised the HSE that all 1,149 disability centres are now registered as at 31 October 2018 under the national standards for residential services for children and adults with disabilities.
This has been a substantial achievement for the sector.
Mental Health Services
The final outturn for Mental Health Services in 2018 was €891m.
In relation to service delivery there were a number of developments progressed in 2018, including: •
€6m investment in service infrastructure.
The advancement of the new National Forensic Mental Health Services capital project.
23.5 new individual placement support workers employed to support people who have attended mental health services returning to work.
9 new housing coordinators employed to support people with mental health needs to live independently.
The process of recruiting 10 CAMHS Advanced Nurse practitioners commenced.
Seven day community mental health services enhanced in all CHO areas.
10,796 children/adolescents; 27,124 adults and 8,553 psychiatry of old age patients seen by mental health services.
Primary Care Services
The final outturn for Primary Care Services in 2018 was €3,997m including the Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS).
Core operational services within Primary Care, Social Inclusion and Palliative Care (excluding PCRS) reported a largely balanced result at the end of 2018, mostly attributable to once off time related savings relating to development funding.
Whilst the opening of multiple primary care centres over recent years has placed additional pressure on the primary care operational cost base, these facilities form a key part of the infrastructure required to provide primary care services to an ageing demographic and underpin the overall shift to primary care.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
The PCRS continues to face significant financial challenges and increased demand for services.
Included in the €3,997m outturn, were nonpay costs in relation to Primary Care and Medical Card Schemes totalling €3,176m which is mainly attributable to pharmaceutical services of €2,100m, doctors' fees and allowances of €572m and €225m on intellectual/physical disabilities, psychiatry and therapeutic services etc.
Health and Wellbeing Services
The final outturn in 2018 for the Health and Wellbeing Division, including National Screening Service and Environmental Health Service, was €214m, reflecting a range of required services which support our whole population to stay healthy and well by focusing on prevention, health promotion and improvement, reducing health inequalities, and protecting people from threats to their health and wellbeing.
The final outturn was broadly in line with overall expectations.
Finance-Related Initiatives
Finance Reform
The Finance Reform Programme continues to support the progression of one of the key non-clinical strategic priorities of the HSE, namely to implement a single modern integrated financial management and procurement system (IFMS) across the Irish health service.
This system, along with the standard national processes it will support, aims to change how Finance operates in the health service.
It will enable our finance teams to better support our services in operating within their available resources while also enhancing their ability to deliver and demonstrate value for patients.
The plan is to see IFMS implemented across 80% (by value) of the health service by Q1 2024, including HSE directly provided services and services provided by HSE funded voluntary organisations (s.38s and larger s.39s).
In 2019, we will complete the procurement of an external systems implementation support partner and commence the national design and build stage. Activity Based Funding
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
hospital activity and in our plans to begin to address the need for a structured approach to community costing.
In 2019, as part of the work on Sláintecare actions, we will bring forward a plan for the further development of ABF over the next three years.
Outlook For 2019
The HSE in 2019 will, within the level of available resources, continue to prioritise the delivery of safe services for its service users and patients whilst also proactively preparing for the implementation of Sláintecare.
The National Service Plan (NSP) 2019 sets out the type and volume of health and social care services to be delivered for the funding level provided by the DoH, and the level of staff that are affordable within that funding level.
The NSP 2019 provides an estimate of the likely scale of financial challenge facing our health and social care services in 2019.
It therefore sets out a range of measures and savings required to produce a balanced result in 2019, along with the risks to the delivery of the NSP.
These measures, building on the lessons learned from the 2018 value improvement programme, were formulated jointly from a combination of the HSE’s internal commissioning process, as well as measures that resulted from engagement with the DoH.
There will be an enhanced focus on the management of staffing levels within affordable limits and on overall financial management in 2019 within the context of the prioritisation of safe services.
This will be supported by a pay and numbers strategy and a savings measures plan, both of which will be agreed with the DoH.
The HSE will continue to place significant focus on efforts to progress the e-Health agenda including working with key internal and external stakeholders to secure the necessary approvals and investment to progress the Electronic Health Record (EHR) programme which is fully aligned with the Sláintecare agenda.
The Sláintecare Report (2017) and Sláintecare Implementation Strategy (2018) signal a new direction for the delivery of health and social care services in Ireland.
It has the potential to create a far more sustainable, equitable, cost effective system that delivers better value for patients and service users.
The HSE is committed to working with the Sláintecare Programme Office and all stakeholders to play our part in successfully bridging the gap between the vision for health service transformation in Ireland and delivery of that change at the frontline.
Changes will result in more positive experiences and better outcomes for patients, service users and their families. Financial Governance
Conclusion
Despite the on-going challenges outlined above, during 2018 the HSE has reported good progress in key areas, including: •
A decrease in inpatient and day case waiting lists (scheduled hospital care).
The provision of more integrated services for older people building on the work of the Integrated Care Programme for Older People.
Introduction of initiatives aimed at improving unscheduled hospital care, such as the Five Fundamentals Programme (leadership, governance, patient flow (pre and post admission), integrated services and using information to measure and monitor improvement).
Introduction of a number of initiatives in respect of nursing and midwifery services during 2018, acknowledging the importance of the skills and services delivered by our nursing staff who make up almost a third of the HSE’s workforce and who are at the forefront of the delivery of services.
In order to create the conditions within which the health service can maximise its ability to attract the investment envisaged by Sláintecare, it is necessary to get to the position where operating within the limits of the available budget is the norm delivered each year.
This includes improving our management of staffing levels so that staffing growth in 2019 is within the level that can be afforded and is therefore sustainable.
This would exclude technical issues such as pensions and recognised demand led schemes, in-year government decisions around public pay etc.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Governance Statement and Directorate Members’ Report Governance
Following the enactment of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013, the HSE Directorate was established as the governing body of the HSE.
The Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013 allows the Minister for Health to issue directions to the HSE on the implementation of Ministerial and government policies and objectives and to determine priorities to which the HSE must have regard in preparing its service plan.
The HSE must comply with directives issued by the Minister for Health under this and the Health Act 2004.
In 2018, the Directorate had collective responsibility as the governing body of the HSE and the authority to perform the functions of the Executive.
It was accountable to the Minister for the performance of these functions.
The Director General, as Chairperson of the Directorate, accounted on behalf of the Directorate to the Minister and was responsible for managing and controlling generally the administration and business of the HSE.
The HSE exercises a wide range of statutory functions which may have significant implications both for individuals and for the public generally.
The legislation recognises that neither the Directorate nor the Director General could exercise all of these functions personally and provides for a formal system of delegation under sections 16C and 16H of the Health Act 2004 (as amended).
This Delegations Policy Framework sets out the framework and supporting policy guidelines that underpin good governance regarding the system of delegation of statutory functions throughout the HSE.
This allows these functions to be undertaken on an operational basis through the Leadership Team and their supporting structures within the organisation.
To provide assistance and advice in relation to the performance of its functions, the Directorate has established a number of Committees including an Audit Committee and a Risk Committee, each of which comprises one appointed National Director and external nominees.
These Directorate Committees act in an advisory capacity and have no executive function.
Further information on the operation of these committees is provided under the relevant headings in this report and an organisation chart is provided at Appendix 2. Under the Health Act 2004, the HSE is required to have in place a Code of Governance, which was updated in 2015 to set out the principles and practices associated with good governance.
The Statement on Internal Control reflects our compliance with the requirements of the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies 2016.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Directorate Responsibilities The duties of the Directorate are set out in the HSE’s Code of Governance and include a wide range of significant functions and duties including responsibility for reviewing, approving and monitoring the progress of the HSE Corporate, Service and Capital Plans.
The Directorate also approves significant expenditure as well as ensuring that financial controls and systems of risk management in place are robust and accountable.
The Directorate is accountable to the Minister for the performance of the HSE’s functions and its own functions as the governing authority of the HSE.
In practice, the Directorate delegates to the Director General all the functions of the HSE, except for the specific functions it reserves to itself.
Standing items considered by the Directorate include: •
Declaration of interests
Reports from committees
Performance reports, and Reserved matters.
The Directorate is responsible for preparing the annual financial statements in accordance with applicable law.
Section 36 of the Health Act 2004 (as amended by the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013), requires the HSE to prepare the annual financial statements in such form as the Minister for Health may direct and in accordance with accounting standards specified by the Minister.
In preparing the annual financial statements, the Directorate is required to: •
Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently
Make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent
Financial Governance
Directorate Structure
State whether applicable accounting standards have been followed, subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements, and
P. Crowley (Term of office ended 31 January 2018)
J. Connaghan (Term of office ended 31 December 2018)
C. Henry (Appointed 16 October 2018)
* Directorate members’ expenses for 2018 are shown for the term of office for each member in 2018.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
The Directorate comprises senior executives appointed by the Minister for Health under legislation (Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013) from persons employed as HSE National Directors or no less senior grade.
In accordance with Government pay policy, public servants who sit on State boards or who may be nominated to such boards independently of their public service employment are not paid remuneration in the form of board fees and their remuneration applies to their HSE executive roles only.
No fees are paid to members of the Directorate.
Audit Committee
Key Personnel Changes
The Audit Committee is appointed by the Directorate.
It acts in an advisory capacity and has no executive function.
The Committee’s duties, as set out in the legislation, are to advise each of the Directorate and the Director General of the HSE on financial matters relating to their functions, including advising them on the following matters:
Ms Anne O’Connor, in her role as Deputy Director General and Chief Operations Officer and Dr Colm Henry, Chief Clinical Officer.
The terms of office of three members of the Directorate ended, Dr Philip Crowley, National Director, Quality Improvement; Mr Tony O’Brien, Director General and John Connaghan, Director General.
Committees
The Act requires the Committee to meet at least four times in each year and to report in writing, at least once in every year, to the Director General and to the Directorate, on the matters upon which it has advised and on the Committee’s activities during the year.
A copy of this report is to be provided to the Minister.
Section 33 of the Health Act 2004 as amended by section 10 of the Health Service Executive (Financial Matters) Act 2014.
Section 33B of the Health Act 2004 as amended by section 11 of the Health Service Executive (Financial Matters) Act 2014.
Section 34A of the Health Act 2004 as amended by section 12 of the Health Service Executive (Financial Matters) Act 2014.
Financial Governance
In accordance with good governance practice, the Audit Committee has in place a Charter which sets out in detail the role, advisory duties and authority of the Committee, along with certain administrative matters.
During 2018, the Committee’s Charter was reviewed in light of the publication by DPER of a revised Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies 2016 which came into effect on the 1 September 2016.
In accordance with best practice, neither the HSE Directorate Chairman nor the Chief Financial Officer is a member of this Committee.
In accordance with the legislation, the Chairman of the Audit Committee cannot be a member of the HSE Directorate.
The following individuals were members of the Audit Committee in 2018:
• Mr Tom O’Higgins (Chairman) – former Chairman of Concern Worldwide, retired partner at PwC, past President and Fellow of Chartered Accountants of Ireland
Prof Patricia Barker – Director of Tallaght Hospital, former Vice President (Academic) DCU, Fellow of Chartered Accountants Ireland
Mr Richard George – retired partner KPMG, Fellow of Chartered Accountants Ireland
Ms Ann Markey – Non-Executive Director and Business Advisor, Fellow of Chartered Accountants Ireland, Associate of the Irish Tax Institute
Mr Stephen McGovern – CRH Group Regulatory, Compliance and Ethics Project Lead: eLearning, Fellow of Chartered Accountants Ireland
Ms Anne O’Connor – HSE Deputy Director General Chief Operations Officer
Mr John Connaghan – HSE Deputy Director General Chief Operations Officer.
Table 8: Attendance at Directorate Committee meetings – Audit Committee HSE Audit Committee
Risk Committee
The Audit Committee met on eight occasions in 2018.
Attendance by each member of the Committee at these meetings is set out in Table 8 including fees and expenses received by each member.
The Directorate appointed a Risk Committee in accordance with the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013 for the purposes of providing assistance and advice in relation to HSE risk management systems to ensure that there is a planned and systematic approach to identifying, evaluating and responding to risks and providing assurances that responses are effective.
In order to discharge its responsibilities, the Committee agreed a work programme for the year reflecting the Committee’s Charter.
In accordance with this work programme, the Committee received regular reports and papers from the Chief Financial Officer and the National Director of Internal Audit, both of whom attended all Committee meetings.
The Director General and other members of the Leadership Team attended when necessary.
The external auditors (Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General) attended Audit Committee meetings as required and had direct access to the Committee Chairman at all times.
The Committee met with the HSE’s external auditors to review the results of the audit of the HSE’s 2017 financial statements and to discuss the audit plan in relation to the 2018 financial statements.
The Audit Committee is responsible, along with the Director General, for guiding, supporting and overseeing the work of the HSE’s Internal Audit Division.
The National Director of Internal Audit attends all Audit Committee meetings, and has regular individual meetings with the Chairman of the Audit Committee.
The Committee received reports from management on financial reporting and financial control matters and processes, compliance with government guidelines on financial issues and financial risk management throughout the year.
The Committee provided its advice to the Directorate and to the Director General principally by means of the minutes of its meetings.
These minutes were made available to, and tabled at, meetings of the Directorate following the relevant Audit Committee meetings.
The Audit Committee maintained a log of its recommended actions and reviewed the progress of management in addressing those recommendations.
The Chairman attended the March 2018 meeting of the Directorate to provide the advice of the Audit Committee in relation to the HSE’s financial statements prior to their approval by the Directorate, and to update the Directorate on the work of the Committee.
In accordance with legislation, the Committee provided a report in writing to the Director General and to the Directorate on the matters upon which it has advised and on the activities of the Committee during 2018.
A copy of this report was provided to the Minister.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
The Risk Committee acts in an advisory capacity and has no Executive function.
The Committee’s duties are to advise both the Directorate and the Director General of the HSE on non-financial matters relating to their functions, including advising them on the following matters:
• Processes related to the identification, measurement, assessment and management of risk in the HSE
• Promotion of a risk management culture throughout the health system.
In accordance with good governance practice, the Risk Committee has put in place a Charter.
The Charter focuses principally on assisting the Directorate in fulfilling its duties by providing an independent and objective review of non-financial risks.
The Committee kept its Charter and work programme under review during the year.
The Risk Committee Charter recognises the establishment by the HSE of a separate HSE Audit Committee, reporting to the Directorate, which is responsible for advising the Directorate on matters relating to all risks of a financial nature.
Membership
The Risk Committee is appointed by the Directorate and consists of one member of the Directorate and not fewer than four other people with relevant skills and experience to perform the functions of the committee.
The following individuals were members of the Risk Committee in 2018: •
Dr Sheelah Ryan – Public Health Physician, former CEO of HSE West/WHB (Chair) •
Mr Simon Kelly – Energy Consultant and former CEO of the National Standards Authority of Ireland •
Mr Pat Kirwan – Deputy Director, State Claims Agency •
Ms Margaret Murphy – WHO Patients for Patient Safety •
Mr Colm Campbell – former Assistant Chief of Staff for the Defence Forces •
Dr Peter Lachman – CEO ISQua
Mr Dean Sullivan – HSE Deputy Director General and Chief Strategy and Planning Officer
Dr Colm Henry – HSE Chief Clinical Officer.
Meetings
The National Director of Quality Assurance and Verification attends all meetings of the Committee.
The Director General, other National Directors, or any other employees attend meetings at the request of the Committee.
The members of the Committee meet separately with the National Director of Quality Assurance and Verification at least once a year.
During the year, the Committee considered a wide range of areas of risk including: the Corporate Risk Register, HSE’s staff health and safety function, internal audit reports concerning the effectiveness of non-financial internal controls, CervicalCheck, General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), quality and patient safety, disability services, National Independent Review Panel Report, consultants not on the specialist register, National Incident Management System, implementation of the HIQA Portlaoise Report recommendations, staff recruitment and retention, and unscheduled care. The National Director of Quality Assurance and Verification attended the Committee meetings to provide assurance on the effectiveness of the systems established by management to identify, assess, manage, monitor and report on risks.
The Committee provided its advice to the Directorate and to the Director General principally by means of the minutes of its meetings and formal correspondence.
These minutes were made available to, and tabled at, meetings of the Directorate following the relevant Risk Committee meetings.
Liaison between the Audit and Risk Committees
The Audit Committee and the Risk Committee both have responsibilities for the provision of advice on certain areas of risk management and internal controls.
The Chairs of the two Committees met on one occasion during the year in order to co-ordinate the work programmes of the two Committees and to ensure continuing clarity in the Committees’ respective areas of responsibility.
Minutes of the meetings of each Committee were tabled regularly at meetings of the other during the year.
Table 9: Attendance at Directorate Committee meetings – Risk Committee HSE Risk Committee
Meetings (Total Meetings 7)
Advice was provided by both Committees in relation to the development of the HSE’s Corporate Risk Register, encompassing both non-financial and financial risks, and in relation to improving the processes for managing and maintaining the Register.
In particular, it will: •
Advise the Directorate on OoCIO’s overall progress in the implementation of its Knowledge and Information Plan
Advise the Directorate through the Committee Chair on the risks to the implementation of the Knowledge and Information Plan, taking account of the current and prospective macroeconomic and healthcare environment, drawing on the overall healthcare reform agenda and the expertise of the group
The steps taken up to now have enabled the HSE to begin to create a structure that allows eHealth to truly become a catalyst for the reform of health care in Ireland.
Review and advise the Directorate on all the OoCIO divisional risk registers and advise of the risk management process in operation in the OoCIO
Advise executive management about the maintenance and promotion of a culture that enables the delivery of the Knowledge and Information Plan
Provide support in the delivery of regular reports on the annual work programme of the OoCIO and advise the Directorate on the adequate resourcing and appropriate standing of this function within the HSE.
Support to the Committees
Support to the Directorate, and its Committees, was provided by the Corporate Secretary, Mr Dara Purcell (Term of office ended 31 May 2018) and Mr Jim O’Sullivan (appointed 1 June 2018).
eHealth Committee
The Committee is not responsible for the executive functions of the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OoCIO) but will exercise an advisory and assurance role in relation to its duties.
The Committee is considered to be an expert group that provides commentary to the OoCIO that enables it to learn lessons from other areas, eHealth and wider.
The Committee advises the Directorate on:
• Providing expert knowledge, guidance and networking opportunities for the OoCIO to aid it on its delivery path
That appropriate arrangements exist to deliver a governance framework which ensures a clear line of sight from high level objectives on a programmatic basis to implementation at business operational level of the content of the Knowledge and Information Plan
That the working of OoCIO is supported by strategic planning, delivery, review and assessment of service performance and strategic performance
That OoCIO is based around the provision of eHealth solutions to health delivery throughout Ireland within government policy and legislation
The promotion of a customer service culture within the operational delivery of ICT, ensuring that the OoCIO remains clinically led and with patient focus at the centre.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
The eHealth Committee met on two occasions in 2018.
During the year, the Committee received a wide range of briefings from the Chief Information Officer (CIO) on the programmes of work currently being undertaken by the OoCIO.
In addition, the Committee provided advice and guidance on a number of national programmes, for example the Children’s Hospital Programme, IT Capability Maturity Framework, Newborn and Maternal, NIMIS and the EHR Programme.
The eHealth Ireland Committee comprises individuals who have very relevant competencies to support the CIO of the HSE in implementing the strategy.
It reviews and recommends implementation strategies to the CIO, and advises the CIO and HSE Directorate on ICT investment decisions.
Financial Governance
Membership
Health services systems and organisation
Clinical knowledge of a wide range of care and care processes (preferably with experience of ICT application)
The Committee contains expertise and experience across a broad range of skills and knowledge including:
Dr James Batchelor – Director of Clinical Informatics Research Unit, Southampton University
Dr Colin Doherty – Consultant, St. James’s Hospital (Epilepsy)
Dr Brian O’Mahony – National ICT Project Manager, GPIT Programme
Dr Áine Carroll – HSE National Director Clinical Strategy and Programmes
Dr Stephanie O’Keeffe – HSE National Director Strategic Planning and Transformation
Mr Leo Kearns – Chief Executive Officer, RCSI
Mr Richard Corbridge – CDIO Leeds Teaching Hospital Trust
Ms Jane Carolan – HSE National Director Health Business Services
Mr Henry Minogue – VP, Chief Information Officer, Virgin Media, Ireland
Ms Helen McBreen – Investment Director, Atlantic Bridge Capital
Ms Yvonne Goff – HSE Clinical Information Officer Lead
Ms Deirdre Lee – Founder, Derilinx
Ms Hazel Chappell – Founder/Clinical Systems Consultant, Cartron Consulting
Dr Martin Curley – Professor of Technology and Business Innovation, NUI Maynooth; Director, Intel Labs Europe Innovation Value Institute
Ms Rachel Flynn – Director of Health Information, HIQA
Prof Brian Caulfield – School of Physiotherapy and Performance Science, Health Sciences Centre (Deputy Chair)
Mr Muiris O’Connor – Assistant Secretary, DoH
Ms Eibhlin Mulroe – CEO, All-Ireland Co-operative Oncology Research Group
Mr Enda Kyne – Director of IT and Technology Transformation, RCSI
Mr Colin McHale – Health and Life Sciences, Industry Director, EMEA, Intel Ireland
Mr Derick Mitchell – CEO, Irish Platform for Patient Organisations, Science and Industry
Mr Trevor O’ Callaghan – HG CEO, Dublin Midlands Hospital Group
Mr Donal Maguire – Consultant, St. Vincent’s University Hospital.
Mr Andrew Griffiths – Chief Information Officer, NHS Wales
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Table 10: Attendance at Directorate Committee meetings – eHealth Committee Total number of meetings
Attendance
P. Nolan (Chair) (Appointed 11 September 2018)
A. Carroll (Term of office ended 30 June 2018)
J. Carolan (Term of office ended 10 April 2018)
T. O’Callaghan (Appointed 11 September 2018)
D. Maguire (Appointed 11 September 2018)
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018 Fees € Expenses €
Financial Governance
Meetings and Documentation
Two meetings were held in 2018 •
20 June – Update on Core Programmes and an introduction to the eHealth Ireland IT Capability Maturity Framework Model, the OoCIO Resourcing compared to other local organisations and the eHealth Ireland Committee ways of working going forward.
12 December – Update on EHR Programme, Patient and Public Roadmapping and eHealth Ireland Committee Framing 2019.
The eHealth Ireland Committee is supported by a secretariat provided through the OoCIO.
The Committee has offered to provide advice and guidance to the EHR programme and has been working in conjunction with DoH and the Office of the Government Chief Information Officer to ensure this can be done within the needed governance model for EHR.
The eHealth Ireland Committee will review its chair and membership every two years.
In 2017 a patient representative body was appointed to the committee.
The eHealth Ireland Committee publishes its minutes, agendas, and content to the eHealth Ireland web site to build towards an agreed transparency agenda around this area.
Disclosures Required by the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (2016)
The Directorate is responsible for ensuring that the HSE has complied with the requirements of the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (‘the Code’), as published by DPER in August 2016.
The following disclosures are required by the code.
Table 11 Statement of Compliance
Employee Short-Term Benefits Employee short-term benefits in excess of €60,000 are set out in note 7 of the Annual Financial Statements.
Consultancy Costs *
Consultancy costs include the cost of external advice to management and exclude outsourced ‘business-as-usual’ functions.
Tax and Financial advisory
Public relations/marketing
Human Resources and Pensions
Strategic Planning and Business improvement
IT Consultancy
Total consultancy costs
Legal Advice
Total consultancy costs further analysed as follows: Consultancy costs capitalised Consultancy costs charged to Income and Expenditure and Retained Revenue Reserves
* Included in Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure, Office and Administration Expenses, Legal and Professional Fees
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Table 11 Statement of Compliance (continued) Legal Costs and Settlements*
The table below provides a breakdown of amounts recognised as expenditure in 2018 in relation to legal costs, settlements and conciliation and arbitration proceedings relating to contracts with third parties.
This does not include expenditure incurred in relation to general legal advice received by the HSE which is disclosed in Consultancy costs above.
Legal fees – legal proceedings
Total * Included in Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure, Office and Administration Expenses, Legal and Professional Fees.
Included in these legal costs there are no costs in relation to on-going matters involving other State bodies.
The number of cases covered by the above legal costs amounted to 1,671 in 2018 (2017: 1,139).
Additional legal costs and settlements were paid by the HSE’s Insurance Company.
The legal costs associated with claims processed by the State Claims Agency under the terms of the Clinical Indemnity Scheme are not included in these legal costs and settlements but are instead included in the costs report in note 11 of the Annual Financial Statements.
Travel and Subsistence Expenditure* Travel and subsistence expenditure is categorised as follows: 2018
Domestic International
* Included in Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure, Office and Administration Expenses, Legal and Professional Fees.
Hospitality Expenditure *
The aggregate total expenditure incurred in relation to hospitality was €Nil.
All entertainment type expenses disclosed in the financial statements relate to Client/Patient clinical programmes and are disclosed under Miscellaneous/Recreation.
* Included in Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure, Other Operating Expenses, Recreation.
Statement of Compliance
The HSE has complied with the requirements of the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies, 2016 and has put in place procedures to ensure compliance with the Code.
Signed on behalf of the Directorate
Chairperson 13 May 2019.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Statement on Internal Control
This Statement on Internal Control represents the position for the year ended 31 December 2018.
It sets out the Health Service Executive’s approach to, and responsibility for, Risk Management, Internal Controls and Governance.
Responsibility for the System of Internal Control
On behalf of the Health Service Executive (HSE) I acknowledge the Directorate’s responsibility for ensuring that an effective system of internal control is maintained and operated.
This statement has been prepared in accordance with the requirement set out in the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform’s (DPER’s) Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (2016).
The Directorate of the HSE was established as the governing body of the HSE in accordance with the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013.
The Directorate is accountable to the Minister for Health for the performance of the HSE through the Director General as Chairman of the Directorate.
The Directorate of the HSE has responsibility for the HSE’s system of internal control and for monitoring its effectiveness.
The Health Service Executive (Governance) Bill 2018, which is due to be enacted in 2019, provides for the creation of a HSE Board and CEO governance structure.
The Bill proposes that the Board will be the governing body of the HSE, accountable to the Minister, and responsible for strengthening governance, oversight and performance.
The CEO of the HSE will be accountable to the Board.
The Bill also contains provision for the establishment of an Audit Committee and any other Committees that the Board deem as necessary.
Purpose of the System of Internal Control
The system of internal control is designed to manage and reduce risk rather than to eliminate risk and as such the review of the system of internal control is designed to provide reasonable but not absolute assurance of effectiveness. The system of internal control seeks to ensure that assets are safeguarded, transactions are authorised and properly recorded and that material errors and irregularities are either prevented or detected in a timely manner.
The system of internal control is also designed to ensure appropriate protocols and policies are in place and operating effectively in the context of clinical and patient safety.
The system of internal control, which accords with guidance issued by the DEPR, has been in place in the HSE for the year ended 31 December 2018, and up to the date of approval of the financial statements, except for the control issues outlined below.
Capacity to Handle Risk
The Directorate, as the governing body of the HSE, has overall responsibility for the system of internal financial control and risk management.
The Directorate may establish committees to provide assistance and advice in relation to the performance of its duties and functions.
The Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013 (2013 Act) provides for the establishment of an Audit Committee and any other Committees that the Directorate deem as necessary for the purpose of providing assistance and advice in relation to the performance of the Directorates functions. The HSE has an Audit Committee, which was established in January 2014, in accordance with the provisions of the 2013 Act.
The membership of the Audit Committee consists of an independent external Chairperson, four other external members and a member of the HSE Directorate.
All members have the relevant skills and experience to perform the functions of the Committee and all external members are highly experienced and qualified Finance Professionals.
The Audit Committee acts in an advisory capacity and has no executive function.
The focus of the Audit Committee in providing advice to the Directorate and the Director General is on the regularity and propriety of transactions recorded in the accounts and on the effectiveness of the system of internal financial control operated by the HSE.
The Audit Committee operates under an agreed Charter which sets out in detail the role, duties and authority of the Committee.
The Audit Committee is required to meet at least four times annually.
In 2018 the Audit Committee met on seven separate occasions and a joint meeting of the Audit and Risk Committees took place on one further occasion.
The HSE has an Internal Audit division with appropriately trained personnel operating in accordance with a written charter approved by the Audit Committee.
The National Director of Internal Audit reports to the Audit Committee and to the Director General of the HSE and is a member of the HSE Leadership team.
The work programme of Internal Audit is agreed with the Audit Committee.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
During 2018, the Internal Audit division completed a substantial body of work as part of its annual risk based work plan, issuing 160 audit reports.
Particular focus was placed on auditing funded agencies as well as ICT audits.
The findings of these reports were considered by the HSE Audit Committee and Leadership Team.
A Risk Committee was established in 2014 in accordance with the provisions of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act, 2013.
The Risk Committee, which reports to the Directorate, has an independent external chairperson and comprises a member of the Directorate and five external members.
The Committee operates under an agreed Charter and focuses principally on assisting the Directorate in fulfilling its duties by providing an independent and objective review of non-financial risks.
The Committee kept its terms of reference and work programme under review during the year.
In 2018 the Risk Committee met on seven separate occasions.
Liaison between the Audit and Risk Committees is facilitated by an annual joint meeting of the two committees and regular engagement between the two Committee Chairs.
The HSE has developed an integrated risk management policy which clearly defines the roles and responsibilities for all levels of staff in relation to risk (financial and non- financial).
The policy is communicated across all levels of staff.
The HSE is committed to ensuring that risk management is seen as the concern of everyone, is embedded both as part of normal day to day business and informs the strategic and operational planning and performance cycle.
Management at all levels of the HSE are responsible to the Director General for the implementation and maintenance of appropriate and effective internal control in respect of their respective functions and organisations.
This embedding of responsibility for the system of internal control is designed to ensure not only that the HSE is capable of detecting and responding to control issues should they arise, with appropriate escalation protocols, but also that a culture of accountability and responsibility pertains throughout the whole organisation.
In Quarter 4 2018, informed by the Scoping Inquiry into the CervicalCheck Screening Programme (Scally Report), the HSE Leadership team commissioned a Risk Management Working Group to prepare proposals in relation to Risk Management in the HSE for consideration by the HSE Risk Committee, the HSE Leadership team and the incoming HSE Board.
This working group is comprised of key senior HSE Managers representing all HSE Divisions, Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs), and Hospital Groups (HGs).
It is sponsored by the National Director, Quality Assurance and Verification (QAV), chaired by the Assistant National Director, Quality Risk and Safety and is supported by an external expert advisor in risk management.
The working group met on four occasions between October 2018 and March 2019 and a draft proposal document for review by management is at a late stage of completion.
The HSE has established a Healthcare audit function, which is part of the HSE’s Quality Assurance and Verification division.
The National Director of Quality Assurance and Verification reports to the Risk Committee and to the Director General, and is a member of the HSE Leadership Team.
The work programme of Healthcare audit is agreed with the Risk Committee.
During 2018, the Healthcare audit team completed 45 audits and the findings were considered by the HSE Risk Committee and Leadership Team.
The annual work programme of the Internal Audit division is co-ordinated with the work programme of the Healthcare audit function and in 2019 this will be further developed to involve joint audits.
Risk and Control Framework
The HSE has developed an Integrated Risk Management policy which has been guided by the principles of risk management outlined in ISO10 31000 (ISO 31000 is an internationally recognised standard informed by experts in the area of risk management).
This policy, and its guidance documentation, has been updated and communicated to all relevant staff during 2018.
The Quality and Patient Safety leads in service areas facilitate and support staff in the application of this policy.
The HSE’s risk management policy involves proactively identifying risks that threaten the achievement of objectives and putting in place actions to reduce these to an acceptable level.
The policy sets out the risk management processes in place and details the roles and responsibilities of staff in relation to risk.
Risk management is the responsibility of all managers and staff at all levels within the HSE.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Risk registers are in place at key levels in the organisation.
These identify the key risks facing the HSE.
Risks on these registers have been assessed and evaluated according to their significance.
At an organisational level the Corporate Risk Register is subject to monitoring and updating on a quarterly basis.
The risk registers set out the existing controls, the risk rating and any additional controls required to mitigate each risk and assigns both persons and timescales for completion of these.
An aspect of the quarterly monitoring process is to monitor the completion of additional controls required and to re-evaluate the risk based on this.
The responsibility for the management of claims from clinical and operational incidents under the Clinical Indemnity Scheme (CIS) and General Indemnity Scheme (GIS) has been delegated to the State Claims Agency (SCA) under statute.
The SCA also provides specialist advice, including risk management advice, to the HSE which is supported by the electronic national incident management reporting system NIMS.
The HSE has in place an internal control framework which is monitored to ensure that there is an effective culture of internal control.
The HSE’s Code of Governance is set out on www.hse.ie and includes the following: •
The Code of Governance reflects the current behavioural standards, policies and procedures to be applied within and by the HSE, and the agencies it funds to provide services on its behalf.
The Performance and Accountability Framework describes in detail the means by which managers in the health service, including those in Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs) and Hospital Groups (HGs) will be held to account for performance in relation to service provision, quality and patient safety, finance and workforce.
There is a framework of administrative procedures in place including segregation of duties, a system of delegation and accountability, a system for the authorisation of expenditure and regular management reporting.
The HSE’s National Financial Regulations form an integral part of the system of internal control and have been designed to be consistent with statutory requirements and to also ensure compliance with public sector guidelines issued by the DEPR.
The HSE has in place a devolved annual budgetary system and each year the Minister for Health formally approves the annual service plan.
Defined accountability limits are set which are closely monitored by the National Performance Oversight Group (NPOG) on behalf of the Director General.
The HSE has in place a wide range of written policies, procedures, protocols and guidelines in relation to operational and financial controls.
The HSE carries out an annual comprehensive review of the system of internal control, details of which are covered in a later section of this report.
There are systems and controls aimed at ensuring the security of the information and communication technology systems within the HSE.
This is an area of high priority for the HSE given the challenges of managing multiple systems across the entire HSE.
There are on-going developments to improve security and to ensure that the HSE has the appropriate level of resource and skills to protect the integrity of its systems to ensure that data and information is protected.
Additionally an annual Controls Assurance Statement (CAS) must be completed by all senior management.
This statement requires management to confirm that they are aware of and comply with the key financial controls and the Code of Governance in place within the HSE.
5. Procurement
The HSE has procedures in place to ensure compliance with current procurement rules and guidelines.
In procuring goods and services, all areas within the HSE must comply with the relevant procurement procedures which are set out in detail in the HSE’s National Financial Regulations.
Matters arising regarding controls over procurement are highlighted under the heading internal control issues.
6. On-going Monitoring and
Review
Formal procedures have been established for monitoring control processes and control deficiencies are communicated to those responsible for taking corrective action and to the Directorate and senior management.
I confirm that the following on-going monitoring systems are in place: •
Key risks and related controls have been identified and processes have been put in place to monitor the operation of those key controls and report any identified deficiencies.
Reporting arrangements have been established at all levels where responsibility for financial management has been assigned
There are regular reviews by senior management of periodic and annual performance and financial reports indicating HSE performance against budgets/forecasts
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
There are regular reviews by the DoH of the HSE’s performance in terms of budget and service plans as well as including other key non-financial reporting such as workforce planning.
The National Performance Oversight Group (NPOG) has delegated authority from the Director General to serve as a key performance and accountability oversight and scrutiny process for the HSE and to support the Director General and the Directorate in overseeing and driving the performance of the HSE’s divisions.
The work of Internal Audit forms an important part of the monitoring of the internal control system within the HSE.
The annual work plan of Internal Audit is informed by analysis of the key risks to which the HSE is exposed and is approved by the Audit Committee.
The National Director of Internal Audit attends all Audit Committee meetings and has regular one to one meetings with the Chairperson of the Audit Committee as well as the Director General.
Monitoring and review of the effectiveness of the HSE’s internal controls is also informed by the work of the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG).
Comments and recommendations made by the C&AG in his management letters, audit certificates or annual reports, are reviewed by the Directorate and Leadership Team and actions are taken to implement recommendations.
Review of their implementation is monitored by NPOG, on behalf of the Directorate, with input from the Audit Committee.
In addition, a National Financial Controls Assurance Group (NFCAG) was also established in 2015 in order to address a number of recurring control weaknesses identified as part of the annual audit of the financial statements and by internal audit and other external reviews.
Since 2015 this group has focused on addressing issues in relation to procurement, taxation, prompt payment interest, pay-related overpayments and cash handling.
This group reports to NPOG.
Annually the HSE requires all relevant senior staff at Grade VIII (or equivalent) and above to complete an internal control questionnaire which is designed to provide essential feedback in respect of key control and risk areas.
This allows the HSE to monitor the effectiveness of key controls and to direct remediation activity where required.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Review of the Effectiveness of the System of Internal Control
I confirm that the HSE has procedures to monitor the effectiveness of its risk management and control procedures.
The HSE’s monitoring and review of the effectiveness of the system of internal control is informed by the work of the Internal and External Auditors, the Audit Committee, the Risk Committee and senior management within HSE responsible for the development and maintenance of the internal control framework.
I confirm that the HSE conducted an annual review of the effectiveness of the Internal Controls for 2018 which took into consideration: •
Audit Committee and Risk Committee minutes/reports
Recommendations from internal audit reports
Findings arising from the Internal Control Questionnaire
Status of the recommendations of previous years’ reports on the Review of the Effectiveness of the System of Internal Control
Recommendations from management letters of the C&AG
The 2018 audit programme of the C&AG and in particular, the audit risks identified therein
Reports of the Committee of Public Accounts
HSE Directorate and Leadership Team minutes
Minutes of steering group/working group/ implementation groups, etc.
External reviews undertaken by the HSE to assist in identifying financial control issues and implementing revised policies and business processes
HSE corporate risk register
Findings and reports arising from the work of the National Financial Controls Assurance Group (NFCAG).
Feedback from the HSE's healthcare audit function.
The report on the review of the system of internal control has been considered by the Audit and Risk Committees and by the Directorate of the HSE.
Financial Governance
The results of the review indicate there is evidence that: •
The HSE has adopted a suite of internal policies and procedures, which form the basis of the internal control framework
Where high level risks have been identified, mitigating/ compensating controls are generally in place
Many instances of non-compliance with these adopted policies and procedures have been identified exposing the organisation to material risk
Awareness of the requirement for internal controls and accountability has increased during 2018 with the number of staff who completed the ICQ survey increasing significantly by circa 26%.
It is clear from the responses received that most managers indicate high levels of compliance with internal controls.
However the lack of uniform consistency of responses again noted in 2018 indicates on-going varying levels of compliance in many control areas.
This information will be used in 2019 to focus work on increasing compliance with specific controls and to raise general awareness of the requirement for compliance with all controls
Reasonable assurance can be placed on the current system of internal control to mitigate and/or manage key inherent risks to which financial activities are exposed.
However a significant number of weaknesses exist in the HSE’s internal financial controls as evidenced by the number of breaches that occur.
Improvements in these areas will continue to receive significant focus from the HSE Leadership Team in the coming years.
In summary, notwithstanding the control weaknesses which were identified and are being addressed by management, including as set out below under section 8 Internal Control Issues, satisfactory levels of compliance with the control framework are generally observed by the majority of staff.
To support this, a new and developing Financial Management Framework has been drafted which defines the process, governance and controls required to demonstrate effective financial management practice.
The National Reporting Strategy, which is a key element of the Financial Management Framework, is a significant piece of work currently underway.
This strategy seeks to ensure that accurate financial information can be readily accessed to deliver better planning and delivery of services.
Preparatory work is underway in the Programme (including the appointment of a Systems Integrator) for the commencement of the detailed design, build and test of the IFMS which will commence in Q4 2019.
IFMS will be deployed in two phases across the entire publicly funded health system commencing in Q4 2020.
Compliance •
Finalisation of a 3-year Compliance Improvement Plan 2017-2020 in Q4 2016, which addresses identified non-compliance issues.
Currently, a compliance improvement programme is being implemented in a systematic manner across selected CHOs and HGs working in conjunction with HBS Procurement.
Development of an online procurement compliance report which provides detail of non-compliance to Service areas.
This report is currently in use but is not yet fully populated for the entire HSE area.
Once fully developed this report will be used to both identify noncompliance and as a benchmark monitoring tool as part of the Compliance Improvement Plan roll-out.
Development of a digital Corporate Procurement Planning (CPP) toolset which will be available to each HG and CHO on-line.
This online tool is expected to provide bespoke analysis and information such as procurement activity, expenditure which is greater than €25K, compliance levels and savings.
The HSE has continued to progress a number of initiatives in 2018 organised around three key themes:
Sourcing
Health Business Service (HBS) Procurement have developed a three-year Sourcing Plan (2016-2019) for the HSE which has the explicit aim of putting in place contracts for all procurable goods and services required by the HSE.
Currently there are central contracts in place covering annual expenditure of circa €1bn.
Key components of this Sourcing Plan relate to: • •
On-going development of the Procurement Project Management System (PPMS) which will support HSE staff with progressing procurement.
Development of the Data Warehouse System to provide visibility of product data and usage including price comparison across legacy systems.
These systems and the on-going stabilisation project will assist budget holders and HBS Procurement in identifying areas where greater efficiencies can be achieved and support compliance with procurement regulations.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
The HSE’s governance framework is consistent with the management and accountability arrangements for grants from Exchequer funding as set out in the instructionissued by DPER in September 2014, with one sanctioned exception in respect of prefunding arrangements.
Due to the specific nature of the funding arrangements with the S38 and S39 organisations the HSE must continue to ensure timely funding particularly in respect of contractual pay and staffing costs which account for up to 80% of expenditure and for which the requirements of the circular are impractical.
Before entering into any funding arrangement the HSE determines the maximum amount of funding that it proposes to make available along with the level of service to be provided for that funding.
For the larger agencies, cash is disbursed by the HSE's treasury unit based on agreed cash profiles.
The system of internal financial control operating in individual funded agencies is subject to review on a sample basis by the HSE’s Internal Audit division and by external audits conducted by the Office of the C&AG.
The audit of the C&AG examined a sample of 63 agencies allocated funding of €500 million across two CHOs.
53 of these agencies (including two for profit agencies) were funded under a Service Arrangement valued at greater than €250k and ten were managed under a Grant Aid Agreement, valued at less than €250k.
As part of that examination, the audit identified control weaknesses relating to the monitoring and oversight of agencies in receipt of exchequer funding.
These findings are consistent with the findings of the HSE’s Internal Audit division during their own internal audit programme of work in respect of funded agencies during 2018.
In addition, the requirement to submit financial reports and staffing returns and to hold monitoring meetings is dependent on the size of the agency.
During 2018, there were weaknesses identified by the HSE’s annual internal control review, via the Controls Assurance Review process, particularly in the application of processes relating to monitoring and oversight of some agencies.
The HSE has two types of contractual agreements with these agencies that are, in the main, tailored to reflect the level of funding in place.
Service Arrangement (SA), health agencies in receipt of funding in excess of €250,000
Grant Aid Agreement (GA), health agencies in receipt of funding of less than €250,000
External and internal audits have found that: •
• Monitoring meetings have not been conducted at the frequency required in accordance with the HSE guidelines in a significant number of the cases reviewed. •
There was a lack of evidence that required financial performance data, such as management accounts and activity data, was submitted at the required frequency in a significant proportion of cases, in particular with respect to S39’s.
These initiatives have enabled the HSE, to a reasonable extent, to be satisfied that there are appropriate governance structures and procedures in place with these service providers.
Agencies which do not sign the SA in accordance with the requirements of the current policy are subject to a withholding of 20% of funding, which has improved compliance rates.
At the end of 2018, 95% (2017: 96%) of funding was covered by a completed SA/ GA
These returns are circulated at regular intervals to the national divisions, Chief Officers of the CHOs and CEOs of the HGs for their necessary attention.
Briefing sessions on the governance framework for both HSE staff and staff from agencies were held in all CHOs in November and December 2018.
The objective of these briefing sessions was to reinforce, in advance of the completion of SAs and GAs for 2019, the key elements of the governance framework in terms of the completion of relevant documentation and the associated processes.
Annual Compliance Statements are required from all section 38 agencies (circa 75% of total funding) and section 39 agencies in receipt of over €3 million (circa 17% of total funding).
The Annual Financial Monitoring Return (AFMR) which provides for the requirements of DPER Circular 13/2014 and which includes an assurance statement on compliance with key financial governance, is completed by all agencies managed by a service arrangement (circa 98% of total funding).
The AMFRs are reviewed in each service area, CHO and HG by relevant staff as appropriate.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
The HSE plans to establish Contract Management Support Units (CMSUs) in each of the nine CHOs.
The CMSUs will be a key resource within the CHOs in terms of enhancing the level of management and oversight in respect of section 38 and section 39 agencies funded by the CHOs.
Phase 1 entails setting up pilot sites in four CHOs and an implementation team has been set up in this regard.
The HSE’s Compliance Unit will continue to act in an advisory and support role during the implementation of this initiative.
The HSE will seek additional resources to ensure CMSUs are set up in all CHOs.
In 2016, the HSE commenced an External Review of Governance at Board and Executive level in certain section 38 agencies.
At 13 May 2019, 23 of these reviews have been completed and the remaining six are underway.
However all Chairs of the Boards of each of these agencies have received either a final report or a draft report to consider.
An overall composite report will be completed which will highlight key issues identified in these reviews.
Each review contains management responses with regard to recommendations set out in the reviews and a follow up process has been established in this regard.
The HSE plans to commence a rolling review programme in 2019 to include large section 39 agencies as well as additional section 38 agencies.
These reviews would expect to draw from and build upon on the work being completed in the current external review process.
A five year cycle is envisaged with eight agencies being reviewed annually.
The HSE’s Compliance Unit have in 2018 carried out a limited review of service arrangements, grant aid agreements and related documentation in two CHOs.
A report is being prepared and the learning from this review will be used to inform the work plans of the CMSUs.
Some of the larger section 38 and section 39 agencies have themselves used the outputs of the Annual Compliance Statement, Annual Financial Monitoring Return and the external reviews, to implement their own initiatives to enhance their Governance at Board level.
In relation to the weaknesses identified in the area of procurement, HBS continues to work with and provide on-going support to the section 38 and section 39 agencies.
All agencies receiving annual funding in excess of €150k have been provided with online access to the HBS Pricing and Assisted Sourcing System (PASS).
This provides access for these agencies to the HBS/OGP contracts and Framework Agreements.
A Corporate Procurement Plan Guidance for Health Agencies has been finalised and has been communicated along with training by HBS Procurement
On-going review of audit findings relating to the governance of grants to outside agencies is a priority for the HSE and there are established processes in place for following up on internal audit as well as external audit findings (local management and national management letters).
Information Communication Technology (ICT)
The Office of the Chief Information Officer (OoCIO) delivers and manages a full range of ICT services throughout the HSE and in part of the voluntary acute sector.
The HSE have a base of over 50,000 users using approximately 1,400 applications and over 1,000 networked sites.
In addition, the OoCIO provide a range of national applications to the acute voluntary sector and indirectly supports their user base.
There are approximately 380 ICT projects currently being progressed, of which about 50 are large multi-annual programmes or projects.
The OoCIO currently has 318 staff, a revenue budget of €42.69m and a capital budget of €85m.
Internal audits have identified weaknesses in the area of security controls across parts of the domain including application password protocols and the management of secure access.
Weaknesses have been acknowledged in some of the areas audited in disaster recovery protocols, particularly in relation to older and legacy systems.
The OoCIO is committed to improving controls in respect of cyber security.
The OoCIO has a number of programmes underway to manage these weaknesses across our large domain.
These include the One ID programme, the single sign-on programme, infrastructure upgrades, and the upgrading of application software which will, over time, provide a means for the following: •
Single logon to domains and applications which ensures that all staff have unique and safe access to the domains and applications
Single email platform to improve cross regional communication and collaboration
Financial Governance
Upgraded infrastructure with modern security features
Upgraded applications and database technology
Migration to One ID has commenced and will continue to be rolled out during 2019 across CHOs, HGs and HBS, as well as central divisions.
Further, the HSE’s Internal Audit division in collaboration with external specialist ICT audit support will continue to conduct targeted audits on a risk management basis.
It is also encouraging to note that this review indicates a growing awareness of the importance of improved accountability and responsibility at all levels of HSE staff, and stronger engagement with the controls assurance process for 2018.
The Directorate acknowledges that it has overall responsibility for the system of internal control within the HSE and will continue to monitor and support further development of controls.
Progress will be reassessed in the 2019 Review of the Effectiveness of the System of Internal Control.
Risk Management
As a result of issues identified by the Scally Report in the area of risk management, the HSE has established a working group, as detailed in section 3 of this statement.
The groups mandate is to prepare proposals in relation to risk management in the HSE, for consideration by the incoming HSE Board, HSE Risk Committee and the HSE Leadership team.
Chairperson 13 May 2019
It is expected that the work of this group will be completed during Q3 2019.
The report on the Review of Effectiveness of the System of Internal Control in the HSE has been considered by the HSE Directorate and reviewed by the Audit and Risk Committees.
The HSE is an organisation undergoing significant change and its control systems still rely on the legacy financial systems of the former health bodies it replaced.
These legacy systems will be replaced on a phased basis, over the next 3-5 years, with a single national integrated financial and procurement system, as part of the finance reform programme which is underway.
The issues in respect to non-compliance identified within the HSE control environment referenced in this statement, underline the need for specific and sustained focus on improvement and compliance at all levels of the organisation.
As evidenced by the HSE’s own review of internal controls, notwithstanding the control breaches which have been identified and which are being addressed by management as set out above in section 7, satisfactory levels of compliance with the control framework are generally observed by the majority of staff.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Comptroller and Auditor General Report for presentation to the Houses of the Oireachtas Health Service Executive
Opinion on the financial statements
I have audited the financial statements of the Health Service Executive for the year ending 31 December 2018 as required under the provisions of Section 36 of the Health Act 2004.
The financial statements comprise •
the statement of revenue income and expenditure
the statement of capital income and expenditure
the statement of financial position
the statement of changes in reserves
the statement of cash flows and
the related notes, including a summary of significant accounting policies.
In my opinion, the financial statements •
properly present the state of the Health Service Executive’s affairs at 31 December 2018 and its income and expenditure for 2018
have been properly prepared in accordance with the accounting standards specified by the Minister for Health as set out in the basis of preparation section of the accounting policies.
Basis of the opinion I conducted my audit of the financial statements in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing (ISAs) as promulgated by the International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI).
My responsibilities under those standards are described in the appendix to this report.
I am independent of the Health Service Executive and have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the standards.
I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.
The Minister has issued an additional derogation for 2018, in respect of the non-recognition of a liability arising from a legal settlement with medical consultants which was agreed in June 2018.
The circumstances giving rise to this exception and the financial effect are set out in Notes 6 and 26 to the financial statements.
My audit opinion is not modified in respect of this matter.
Reporting on information other than the financial statements, and on other matters The Health Service Executive has presented certain other information together with the financial statements.
This comprises the annual report including the governance statement and Directorate members’ report, and the statement on internal control.
My responsibilities to report in relation to such information, and on certain other matters upon which I report by exception, are described in the appendix to this report.
Non-compliance with procurement rules The Health Service Executive is still not in a position to quantify the value of its expenditure on goods and services where the procedures employed did not comply with procurement guidelines.
Based on sample testing, my audit identified a significant level of non-compliant procurement that is consistent with findings in previous years.
There was non-compliance in relation to 30% (by value) of a sample of payments examined at five Health Service Executive locations visited by the audit.
The total value of the sample was €66.1 million.
The statement on internal control sets out the steps being taken by the Executive to address its non-compliance with procurement rules.
However, the Executive acknowledges that it will take a number of years to fully address procurement compliance issues.
Emphasis of matter
Note 1 to the financial statements sets out the significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the financial statements.
These include a number of exceptions to generally accepted accounting principles which the Minister has directed are to be applied by the Health Service Executive.
Comptroller and Auditor General 13 May 2019
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Appendix to the Report
Responsibilities of Directorate members
The governance statement and Directorate members’ report sets out the Directorate members’ responsibilities.
The members are responsible for •
the preparation of financial statements in the form prescribed under section 36 of the Health Act 2004 and accounting standards specified by the Minister for Health
ensuring the regularity of transactions
assessing whether the use of the going concern basis of accounting is appropriate, and
such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Responsibilities of the Comptroller and Auditor General
I am required under Section 36 of the Health Act 2004 to audit the financial statements of the Health Service Executive and to report thereon to the Houses of the Oireachtas.
My objective in carrying out the audit is to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement due to fraud or error.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with the ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
As part of an audit in accordance with the ISAs, I exercise professional judgment and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit.
In doing so, •
I identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements whether due to fraud or error; design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks; and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.
The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
I obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the internal controls.
I evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures.
I conclude on the appropriateness of the use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, on whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Health Service Executive’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion.
My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Health Service Executive to cease to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on other matters
My audit is conducted by reference to the special considerations which attach to State bodies in relation to their management and operation.
I report if I identify material matters relating to the manner in which public business has been conducted.
I seek to obtain evidence about the regularity of financial transactions in the course of audit.
I report if I identify any material instance where public money has not been applied for the purposes intended or where transactions did not conform to the authorities governing them.
I also report by exception if, in my opinion, •
I have not received all the information and explanations I required for my audit, or
the accounting records were not sufficient to permit the financial statements to be readily and properly audited, or
the financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure For the year ended 31 December 2018 Notes
Income
Department of Health Revenue Grant
Deficit on Revenue Income and Expenditure brought forward
Patient Income
Other Income
Expenditure
Pay and Pensions
Clinical
Non Clinical
Other Client/Patient Services
Non Pay
Clinical
Patient Transport and Ambulance Services
Primary Care and Medical Card Schemes
Other Client/Patient Services
Housekeeping
Office and Administration Expenses
Other Operating Expenses
Long Stay Charges Repaid to Patients
Hepatitis C Insurance Scheme
Payments to State Claims Agency
Nursing Home Support Scheme (Fair Deal) – Private Nursing Home only
All gains and losses with the exception of depreciation and amortisation have been dealt with through the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure and the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure.
The primary financial statements of the HSE comprise the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure, Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure, Statement of Changes in Reserves, Statement of Financial Position and Statement of Cash Flows.
Chairperson
Chief Financial Officer
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure For the year ended 31 December 2018 Notes
Income
Department of Health Capital Grant
Surplus on Capital Income and Expenditure brought forward
Revenue Funding Applied to Capital Projects
Application of Proceeds of Disposals
Government Departments and Other Sources
Expenditure
Net Capital Surplus for the Year
All gains and losses with the exception of depreciation and amortisation have been dealt with through the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure and the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure.
The primary financial statements of the HSE comprise the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure, Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure, Statement of Changes in Reserves, Statement of Financial Position and Statement of Cash Flows.
Chairperson
Chief Financial Officer
Statement of Compliance and Basis of Preparation
The financial statements have been prepared on an accruals basis, in accordance with the historical cost convention.
Under Section 36(3) of the Health Act 2004, the Minister specifies the accounting standards to be followed by the HSE.
The HSE has adopted Irish and UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), FRS 102, in accordance with accounting standards issued by the Financial Reporting Council subject to the following exceptions specified by the Minister:
1. Depreciation is not charged to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure, rather it is charged against the Capitalisation (Reserve) Account balance.
Under GAAP, depreciation must be charged in the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure.
2. Capital grants received from the State to fund the purchase of property, plant and equipment are recorded in the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure.
Under GAAP, capital grants are recorded as deferred income and amortised over the useful life of related property, plant and equipment, in order to match the accounting treatment of the grant against the related depreciation charge.
Capital expenditure in relation to assets, other than those purchased by way of service concession arrangement, are recognised in the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure as incurred.
Under FRS 102, such expenditure is capitalised and charged to income and expenditure over the life of the asset.
3. Pensions are accounted for on a ‘pay as-you go’ basis.
The provisions of FRS 102 ‘Section 28: Employee Benefits’ are not applied and the liability for future pension benefits accrued in the year has not been recognised in the financial statements.
4. Claims under the Clinical Indemnity Scheme which are paid by the HSE, and administered by the State Claims Agency on the HSE’s behalf, are accounted for on a ‘pay as-you go’ basis.
This does not comply with FRS 102 ‘Section 21 – Provisions and Contingencies’.
Details of the amount recognised in the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure in 2018, together with the actuarially estimated future liability attaching to this scheme at 31 December 2018, are set out in Note 11.
Going Concern
The Directorate assumes that all existing HSE activities will therefore continue and that, as there is a continuance of the activity of the entity, the financial statements for 2018 continue to be prepared on the going concern basis.
Income Recognition
Department of Health Revenue and Capital Grant Monies to fund the health service are voted to the Department of Health (DoH) (Vote 38).
The DoH provides grants to the HSE in respect of administration, capital and non-capital services.
Section 33(1) of the Health Act 2004, as amended provides that each year the Minister will issue a Letter of Determination to the HSE setting out the maximum expenditure it may incur in the relevant financial year.
The final Letter of Determination in relation to 2018 was received on 23 January 2019.
In accordance with the accounting standards prescribed by the Minister, the HSE accounts for grants on an accruals basis.
Accordingly, the amount specified in the Letter of Determination for the relevant financial year is recognised as income in that year.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Grant income in respect of administration and non-capital services is accounted for: •
in the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure where it is applied to non-capital areas of expenditure;
in the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure under the heading ‘Revenue Funding Applied to Capital Projects’ where non-capital grant monies is used to fund capital expenditure.
Grant income in respect of capital services is accounted for in the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure.
Section 33(3) of the Health Act 2004, as amended, requires the HSE to manage and deliver services in a manner that is in accordance with an approved Service Plan and within the determination notified by the Minister.
The Act provides for any deficits to be charged to income and expenditure in the next financial year and, subject to the approval of the Minister with the consent of the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform (DPER), for surpluses to be credited to income and expenditure in the next financial year.
Other Income
Lease incentives are recognised over the lease term on a straight line basis.
At initial recognition, a finance lease liability is also recognised at an amount equal to the fair value of the leased property or, if lower, the present value of the minimum lease payments.
(iii) Income from all other sources is recognised when received.
Grants to Outside Agencies
Capital Grants
The HSE funds a number of service providers and bodies for the provision of health and personal social services on its behalf, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 38 and 39 of the Health Act 2004.
Before entering into such an arrangement, the HSE determines the maximum amount of funding that it proposes to make available in the financial year under the arrangement and the level of service it expects to be provided for that funding.
This accounting treatment, which does not comply with generally accepted accounting principles, is a consequence of the exceptions to generally accepted accounting principles specified by the Minister.
Leases HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Property, Plant and Equipment and Capitalisation Account
Valuation – Property, Plant and Equipment comprise Land, Buildings, Work in Progress, Equipment and Motor Vehicles.
The carrying values of assets taken over from predecessor bodies by the HSE were included in the opening balance sheet on establishment day, 1 January 2005, at their original cost/valuation.
The related aggregate depreciation account balance was also included in the opening Statement of Financial Position.
On establishment of the HSE, land of predecessor bodies was included at valuation based on rates per hectare/square metre supplied by the Department of Health and Children following consultation with the Valuation Office.
These valuations were last updated in 2002.
The HSE continues to value land taken over from predecessor bodies using these rates.
It should be noted that lands owned by the HSE are held for the provision of health and personal social services.
Property, plant and equipment additions since 1 January 2005 are stated at historic cost less accumulated depreciation.
Capital Expenditure Recognition – In accordance with the accounting standards prescribed by the Minister, expenditure on property, plant and equipment additions is charged to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure or the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure, depending on whether the asset is funded by capital or revenue funding.
Capitalisation Policy – Capital funded assets and revenue funded assets are capitalised if the cost exceeds certain value thresholds: €2,000 for computer equipment and €7,000 for all other asset classes.
Asset additions below this threshold and funded from revenue are written off in the year of purchase.
Asset additions below this threshold funded from capital are included in Note 13(b) under ‘Expenditure on HSE projects not resulting in Property, Plant and Equipment additions’.
A breakdown of asset additions by funding source is provided in Note 13(a) to the accounts.
Primary Care Centres acquired under Public Private Partnership (PPP) service concession arrangements are capitalised and accounted for using the finance lease liability model.
The value of the Primary Care Centre asset and the service concession liability is recognised as assets and liabilities in the Statement of Financial Position at amounts equal to the fair value of the leased property or, if lower, the present value of the minimum lease payments, each determined at the inception of the lease.
Future minimum lease payments are calculated from the unitary charge payments set out in the contract, to be made directly by the HSE.
The property elements of the unitary charge plus any reliably measured capital element of operational payments are used as the basis of the future minimum lease payments.
PPP service concession arrangements are accounted for in the HSE's accounts using the Capital Investment Approach.
This provides for the accumulation of capital value reflecting the State’s equity in PPP property assets.
Using this approach, the PPP capital commitment is recognised in the Capitalisation (Reserve) Account at an amount equal to the related finance lease liability.
Over the life of the concession, the reduction in the outstanding finance lease liability is amortised annually through the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure with the corresponding entry to the Capitalisation (Reserve) Account.
Depreciation – In accordance with the accounting standards specified by the Minister for Health, depreciation is not charged to the Statement of Income and Expenditure over the useful life of the asset.
Instead, a Statement of Financial Position reserve account, the Capitalisation Account, is the reciprocal entry to Property, Plant and Equipment.
Depreciation is charged to the Property, Plant and Equipment and Capitalisation Accounts over the useful economic life of the asset.
Assets are not depreciated where they have been acquired or are managed under PPP service concession agreements which guarantee residual useful lives and operating capacity at the end of the concession term that would be equivalent to that of the asset when it was first commissioned.
Other fixed assets, where subject to depreciation, are depreciated for a full year in the year of acquisition.
Residual value represents the estimated amount which would currently be obtained from disposal of an asset, after deducting estimated costs of disposal, if the asset were already of an age and in the condition expected at the end of its useful life.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Depreciation on all other property, plant and equipment is calculated to write-off the original cost/valuation of each asset over its useful economic life on a straight line basis at the following rates: •
Land: land is not depreciated.
Buildings: depreciated at 2.5% per annum.
Modular buildings (i.e. prefabricated buildings): depreciated at 10% per annum.
Work in progress: no depreciation.
Equipment – computers and ICT systems: depreciated at 33.33% per annum.
Equipment – other: depreciated at 10% per annum.
Motor vehicles: depreciated at 20% per annum.
On disposal of fixed assets, both the Property, Plant and Equipment and Capitalisation Accounts are reduced by the net book value of the asset disposal.
An analysis of the movement on the Capitalisation Account is provided in the Statement of Changes in Reserves.
The Multi-Annual Delegated Capital sanction 2015-2018 was issued in December 2015 by DPER.
The Letter of Sanction 2018 for Capital provides for an allowance to re-invest proceeds of sale of fixed assets of up to €6 million in 2018 (2017: €4 million).
Public Private Partnerships Service Concession Agreements Service charge elements of the unitary charge payments are expensed in the Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure. Obligations to make payments of an operational nature are disclosed in Note 22 to the financial statements. Pensions
(i) Superannuation paid to retired HSE employees is accounted for within the pay classification (see Note 6); (ii) Superannuation paid to retirees from the voluntary health service providers is accounted for under grants to outside agencies within the non-pay classification (see Note 8 and Appendix 1). The HSE has entered into a PPP or service concession agreement with a private sector entity to design, build, finance and maintain infrastructure assets for a specified period of time (concession period).
This is a single PPP contract for the delivery of fourteen Primary Care Centres (PCCs).
Contributions from HSE employees who are members of the schemes are credited to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure when received. Contributions from employees of the voluntary health service providers who are members of the scheme are retained as income of the health service provider.
No provision has been made in respect of pension benefits earned by employees and payable in future years under the pension scheme, consistent with the accounting treatment in previous years.
The contract entered into is on an availability basis and is for a 25 year service period from the date of service commencement for each PCC. It is payable by way of an annual unitary charge.
The unitary charge is subject to deductions for periods when the assets are unavailable for use.
The asset value is recognised in the 2018 AFS at the present value of the minimum lease payments.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
The Public Service (Single Scheme and Other Provisions) Act 2012 introduced the new Single Public Service Pension Scheme (“Single Scheme”) which commenced with effect from 1 January 2013.
All new staff members to the Health Service Executive, who are new entrants to the Public Sector, on or after 1 January 2013 are members of the Single Scheme.
Single Scheme member contributions are paid over to DPER.
Financial Governance
Pension Related Deduction
Accrued Holiday Pay
Under the Financial Emergency Measures in the Public Interest Act 2009, a pension levy was introduced for all staff who are members of a public service pension scheme, including staff of certain HSE funded service providers.
Pension levy collected by service providers as well as pension levy deducted from HSE staff is accounted for as income by the HSE.
Details of amount deducted in respect of the pension levy are set out in Note 5(a) to the Financial Statements.
Salaries, wages and employment related benefits are recognised in the period in which the service is received from employees.
The cost of leave earned but not taken by employees at the end of the financial year is recognised in the financial statements to the extent that employees are permitted to carry forward unpaid annual leave into the following year.
Due to different payroll systems across the HSE it was necessary to make assumptions in order to calculate the accrual.
The assumptions underlying the holiday pay accrual, for which amounts are recognised in the financial statements, are determined (including employee profiles and the pattern of holidays taken) based on current conditions.
Inventories Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Net realisable value is the estimated proceeds of sale less costs to be incurred in the sale of inventory.
The HSE historically carries a provision against specific vaccine inventories, and any other write offs and adjustments for obsolescence are charged in the current year against revenue income and expenditure.
Patients’ Private Property
Monies received for safe-keeping by the HSE from or on behalf of patients are kept in special accounts separate and apart from the HSE’s own accounts.
Such accounts are collectively called Patients’ Private Property accounts.
The HSE is responsible for the administration of these accounts.
However, as this money is not the property of the HSE, these accounts are not included on the HSE’s Statement of Financial Position.
The HSE acts as trustee of the funds.
Patients’ Private Property accounts are independently audited each year.
Critical Accounting Judgements and Estimates
In line with FRS 102, the effective interest rate is used to discount the future construction related liabilities arising from concession agreements.
The HSE selected a discount rate of 3.32% after consultation with the National Development Finance Agency (NDFA), on the basis that it reflects an appropriate rate for long term infrastructure assets.
The Directorate have reviewed the asset lives and associated residual values of the Primary Care Centres and have concluded that the asset lives and residual values are appropriate.
Audit fees
Remuneration – Director General
Net operating deficit for the year is arrived at after charging:
* The Director General (1 January 2018 to 11 May 2018) received total payments of €238,207 during 2018, comprising basic salary payments of €139,649 and severance pay of €98,558.
The Interim Director General (12 May 2018 to 31 December 2018) received total payments of €112,468 in basic pay in this capacity.
The Director General’s remuneration package comprises basic pay only.
No allowances, bonuses or perquisites apply to the post.
The Director General is a member of the HSE pension scheme and their pension entitlements do not extend beyond the standard entitlements of the public sector model scheme.
Dr. Philip Crowley (resigned 31 January 2018)
John Connaghan (resigned 31 December 2018)
Pat Healy (resigned 31 July 2017)
Directorate members’ expenses* Tony O’Brien (resigned 11 May 2018) Stephen Mulvany
Anne O’Connor (appointed 11 June 2018) Liam Woods (resigned 31 August 2017) Dr Colm Henry (appointed 16 October 2018)
* Directorate members’ expenses for 2018 are shown from the date of appointment.
The Directorate comprises senior executives appointed by the Minister of Health under legislation (Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013) from persons employed as HSE National Directors or no less senior grade.
In accordance with Government pay policy, public servants who sit on State boards or who may be nominated to such boards independently of their public service employment are not paid remuneration in the form of board fees and their remuneration applies to their HSE executive roles only.
No fees are paid to members of the Directorate.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 3 Department of Health Revenue and Capital Grant 3(a) Department of Health Revenue and Capital Grant 2018 €’000
Revenue Grant balance due from Department of Health (up to Approved Allocation) carried forward
Revenue Grant balance due from Department of Health (up to Approved Allocation) as at 31 December
Net Revenue Funding allocated to HSE Less: Capital Funding
Department of Health Revenue Grant The table below provides further analysis of Department of Health funding received.
Revenue Grant – Funding allocation from the Department of Health Less: Remittances from Department of Health between 1 January and 31 December
Capital Grant – Funding allocation from the Department of Health Less: Remittances from Department of Health between 1 January and 31 December Capital Grant balance due from Department of Health (up to Approved Allocation) carried forward Balance forward utilised during the year Capital Grant balance due from Department of Health (up to Approved Allocation) as at 31 December Total Revenue and Capital Grant due from Department of Health, up to Approved Allocation, as at 31 December (Note 17)
Note 4 Patient Income 2018 €’000
Inpatient Charges
Emergency Department Charges
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 5 Other Income
(a) Other Income 2018 €’000
Superannuation Income
Pension levy deductions from HSE own staff
Canteen Receipts
Certificates and Registration Income
Parking
Secondments Recoupments of Pay
Rental Income
Donations
Legal Costs Recovered
Income from other Agencies (See Note 5(b) analysis below)
Miscellaneous Income
Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade – Irish Aid: programme for overseas development
Friends of St. Luke's Rathgar
Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional and Gaeltacht Affairs – Helicopter Services
EU Income – various projects
Genio Trust (Mental Health Projects)
Education and Training Boards/ Solas
Katherine Howard Foundation – Nurture
National Treatment Purchase Fund
(b) Income from Other Agencies*
Department of Children and Youth Affairs – Young Peoples Facilities and Services Clinical Trials Ireland – Clinical Research Trials
The Atlantic Philanthropies – Single Assessment Tool for the Elderly The Atlantic Philanthropies – National Dementia Strategy Department of Children & Youth Affairs/TUSLA – Galway Teen Parents Support Programme
Friends of Wexford General Hospital
* Only income from agencies in excess of €100,000 in either year are shown.
Income from Other Agencies that did not exceed €100,000 in either year is shown at Note 5(a) under Miscellaneous Income.
Accordingly, the 2017 comparatives above have been re-stated where appropriate.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 6 Pay and Pensions Expenditure 2018 €’000
Health and Social Care Professional
Superannuation
Medical/Dental
Nursing
Health and Social Care Professional
Management/Administration
General Support Staff
Superannuation
Management/Administration
General Support Staff
Other Patient and Client Care
Superannuation
Clinical HSE Staff
Medical/Dental
Nursing
Clinical Agency Staff
Non Clinical HSE Staff
Non Clinical Agency Staff
Other Client/Patient Services HSE Staff
Other Client/Patient Services Agency Staff
Other Patient and Client Care
Total Pay Expenditure
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 6 Summary Analysis of Pay Costs Clinical
Non Clinical
Weekends
On-Call
Employer PRSI
Wages and Salaries
Total HSE Pay
Agency Pay
Total Pay
* Clinical arrears in 2018, includes the reversal of a legacy provision of €68 million relating to the ongoing consultants liability.
This has resulted in a one off benefit in the year which will not be replicated, see Note 26.
Total Pay Costs above relate to HSE services only.
Pay costs for employees in the voluntary sector are accounted for under Non-Pay Expenditure (Revenue Grants to Outside Agencies).
See Note 8 and Appendix 1.
Superannuation
Eligible staff employed in the HSE are members of a variety of defined benefit superannuation schemes.
Superannuation entitlements (i.e. pensions) of retired staff are paid out of current income and are charged to income and expenditure in the year in which they become payable.
In accordance with a Directive from the Minister for Health, no provision is made in the financial statements in respect of future pension benefits and no charge is made to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure in respect of this.
Superannuation contributions from employees who are members of these schemes are credited to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure when received.
No formal actuarial valuations of the HSE’s pension liabilities are carried out.
The Pension charge to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure for 2018 was €728m (2017: €686m), which included payments in respect of once-off lump sums and gratuity payments on retirement of €128m (2017: €115m).
Ongoing superannuation payments to pensioners
Once-off lump sums and gratuity payments
**Analysis of Superannuation
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Termination Benefits
Termination benefits charged to Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure
The termination benefits above relate to settlements with five staff during 2018.
In addition to the payments outlined above, no staff were granted added years on termination.
The value of the enhanced pension arrangements was €nil.
Legal costs of €28,380 were also incurred in relation to concluding the termination agreements.
Note 7 Employment
The number of employees at 31 December by Area of Operation was as follows (in whole time equivalents (WTEs)):** 2018
Mental Health
Primary Care
Disability and Older Persons’ Services
Ambulance Services
Corporate and HBS
Total HSE employees
Voluntary Sector – Non Acute Services
Sub-total Section 38 Sector employees ***
Health and Wellbeing
Total Health Sector Employees (including Home Helps) ****
Source: Health Service Personnel Census * 2017 figures are restated to reflect current methodology and organisational mappings. ** All figures are calculated to 2 decimals and expressed as whole-time equivalents (WTE) under a methodology as set out by the Department of Health.
*** Health Sector staffing figures relate to direct employment levels as returned through the Health Service Personnel Census (HSPC) for the public health sector (HSE & Section 38 Voluntary Hospitals & Agencies).
**** Directly employed home help staff are included in reported WTE w.e.f. 2018 and historical figures have been restated to reflect this methodology change.
Pre-registration Student Nurses on clinical placement are recorded @ 50% actual WTE in line with WRC agreement.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Additional Analysis – Department of Expenditure and Reform Circular 13/2014 requirement The number of HSE employees whose total employee benefits (including basic pay, allowances, overtime, night duty, weekends, on-call, arrears and excluding employer PRSI, employer pension costs) for the reporting period fell within each band of €10,000 from €60,000 upwards are as follows: Pay Band (Number of Staff)
Total HSE employees
The HSE does not have an integrated payroll system and this disclosure which is required by DPER circular 13/2014 has therefore been prepared from multiple payroll systems across HSE areas. * 
The table above reports that one member of HSE staff received a payment in the banding between €970k and €980k.
This is not a payment for salary earned in 2017 as it incorporates backdated arrears of pay since 2010 including basic pay, allowance, overtime, night duty, weekend and on calls.
This employee is a senior clinical staff member whose actual employee benefits for 2017 would have fallen within the pay banding €210k to €220k.
All backdated payments are as per HSE consolidated pay scales.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 8 Non Pay Expenditure 2018 €’000
Drugs and Medicines (excl. demand led schemes)
Less Rebate from Pharmaceutical Manufacturers*
Net Cost Drugs and Medicines (excl. demand led schemes)
Blood/Blood Products
Medical Gases
Medical/Surgical Supplies
Other Medical Equipment
Clinical
Professional Services (e.g. therapy costs, radiology, etc.)
Education and Training
Patient Transport
Vehicles Running Costs
X-Ray/Imaging
Laboratory
Patient Transport and Ambulance Services
Primary Care and Medical Card Schemes Pharmaceutical Services
Less Rebate from Pharmaceutical Manufacturers* Less Prescription Levy Charges
Net Cost Pharmaceutical Services Doctors’ Fees and Allowances
Dental Treatment Services Scheme
Community Ophthalmic Services Scheme
Cash Allowances (Blind Welfare, Mobility, etc.)
Elderly and Non-Fair Deal Nursing Home Payments
Rehabilitative and Vocational Training
Professional Services e.g. care assistants, childcare contracted services, etc.
Education and Training
Pension Payments to Former District Medical Officers/Dependents
Capitation Payments:
Treatment Abroad Schemes and Related Expenditure Intellectual/Physical Disabilities, Psychiatry, Therapeutic Services, etc.
Respite Beds
Other Client/Patient Services
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Catering
Heat, Power and Light
Cleaning and Washing
Furniture, Crockery and Hardware
Bedding and Clothing
Legal and Professional Fees
Bad and Doubtful Debts
Education and Training
Travel and Subsistence
Rent and Rates
Computers and Systems Maintenance
Ex Gratia Payments to Patients**
Refunds
Housekeeping
Office and Administration Expenses Maintenance
Recreation (Residential Units) Materials for Workshops
Meals on Wheels Subsidisation
* In respect of 2016 IPHA Agreement and special arrangements for specific drugs and medicines.
** This relates to CervicalCheck payments
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 9 The Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 The Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 provides the legislative basis for the repayment of what has been referred to as ‘long stay charges’, which were incorrectly levied on persons with full medical card eligibility prior to 14 July 2005.
The scheme allows for the repayment of charges to the following people: •
Living people who were wrongly charged at any time since 1976
The estates of people who were wrongly charged and died on or after 9 December 1998
A special account was set up which is funded by monies provided by the Oireachtas and from which repayments are made.
An amount of €2m was set aside in 2018 for this purpose.
The majority of this funding refers to a provision for payments that will arise as a result of follow-on claims and offer acceptances.
The best estimate of the total cost of repayments, at the inception of the scheme, based on the terms as set out in the Act was up to €1bn.
Repayments were expected to be made to approximately 20,000 living patients and to the estates of approximately 40,000 to 50,000 deceased former patients.
The scheme closed to new applicants on 31 December 2007 and nearly 14,000 claims have been received in respect of living patients and nearly 27,000 claims in respect of estates.
Up to 31 December 2018, 20,299 claims were paid.
As at December 2018, there were no outstanding claims being processed to offer stage under the scheme.
€2m has been provided in the HSE’s 2019 budget to fund repayments for outstanding claims and associated administrative costs.
The cumulative total expenditure of the scheme (including administrative costs) to 31 December 2018 is €485.690m.
In 2018, the following expenditure has been charged to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure in respect of the Repayments Scheme: 2018 €’000
Non Pay
Repayments to Patients
Payments to Third Party Scheme Administrator
Legal and Professional Fees
Office Expenses* * All expenditure in relation to the Health (Repayment Scheme) Act 2006 is included in HSE expenditure.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 10 The Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act 2006
The Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act 2006 established a statutory scheme to address insurance difficulties experienced by persons infected with Hepatitis C and HIV through the administration within the State of blood and blood products.
This scheme addresses the problems faced by these persons due to their inability to purchase mortgage protection and life assurance policies as a result of contaminated blood products being administered to them.
The scheme will cover the insurance risk for the 1,700 or more people entitled to avail of assurance products, regardless of any other medical conditions these people may have, once they pay the standard premium that an uninfected person of the same age and gender would pay.
The life assurance element of the scheme was launched by the HSE in September 2007.
A further element, providing for travel insurance cover, was introduced in March 2009.
The overall cost over the lifetime of the scheme was originally estimated at €90m.
The cumulative expenditure on the insurance scheme to 31 December 2018 was €10.3m.
In 2018, the following expenditure has been charged to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure in respect of the Insurance Scheme: 2018 €’000
Payments of premium loadings
Payments of benefits underwritten by HSE
Office Expenses*
* All expenditure in relation to the Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act 2006 is included in HSE expenditure. ** These costs are included in the Hepatitis C Insurance Scheme Special Account.
Other Hepatitis C Costs are included in the Hepatitis C Special Account and the Hepatitis C Reparation Account.
Note 11 State Claims Agency Since 1 July 2009, the HSE is funded for claims processed by the State Claims Agency under the terms of the Clinical Indemnity Scheme.
From 1 January 2010, the National Treasury Management Agency (Delegation of Functions) Order 2009 extended the State indemnity to personal injury and third party property damage claims against the HSE.
Awards paid to claimants under the terms of the scheme are accounted for on a pay-as-you-go basis.
The State Claims Agency’s best current estimate of the ultimate cost of resolving each claim, includes all foreseeable costs such as settlement amounts, plaintiff legal costs and defence costs such as fees payable to counsel, consultants, etc.
In 2018, the charge to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure was €318.7m (2017: €283.2m).
Based on actuarial estimates, the charge to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure is expected to increase significantly in future years.
In accordance with the directions of the Minister for Health, no provision has been made for this liability in the financial statements.
The estimated liability is revised on a regular basis in light of any new information received, for example past trends in settlement amounts and legal costs.
At 31 December 2018, the estimated liability incurred to that date under the Clinical Indemnity Scheme and State indemnity was €2,792m (2017: €2,354m).
Of this €2,792m, approximately €2,332m relates to active claims in respect of clinical care, with the balance of the estimated liability relating to non-clinical care claims.
Active claims are those that have been notified to the State Claims Agency through legal process and that have not yet concluded as at the reporting date.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 12 Long-Term Residential Care (incorporating Nursing Homes Support Scheme/Fair Deal) The Nursing Homes Support Scheme (Fair Deal) commenced in 2009 and phases out the former Nursing Homes Subvention Scheme and the ‘contract beds’ system for older persons.
Under the scheme, people who need long term residential care services have their income and assets assessed, and then contribute up to 80% of assessable income and up to 7.5% of the value of the assets they own towards the cost of their care.
The HSE pays the balance, if any, of the costs of their care in both public and registered private nursing homes covered under the scheme.
Costs of Long-Term Residential Care (Nursing Homes Support Scheme/Fair Deal) 2018 €’000
Section 39 Agencies
Private Nursing Homes Contract Beds and Subvention Payments
Total Payments to Private Nursing Homes including Section 39 Agencies
Gross NHSS Cost of Public Nursing Homes*
Payments to Section 38 Agencies
Nursing Home Fixed and Other Unit Costs
Private Nursing Homes
Total Long Term Residential Care
* Public nursing homes costs are included under the relevant expenditure headings in the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure.
Patient contributions
NHSS recipient contributions for those patients in public homes amounted to €61.128m (2017: €60.483m) and are included in the HSE Financial Statements – Revenue Income & Expenditure Account.
NHSS recipient contributions for those patients in voluntary centres (S38 Organisations) amounted to €6.669m (2017: €7.435m), is retained by those centres and does not constitute income for the HSE.
Additional Income
Under Section 27 of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme Act 2009 a Schedule of Assets must be submitted to the HSE in respect of a deceased person who received financial support under the Scheme.
This is checked to identify and calculate any overpayment of financial support that is repayable to the HSE pursuant to Section 42 of the Act.
The HSE collected income of €6.579m during 2018 (2017: €5.146m) in respect of non-declared income and assets of Fair Deal clients.
Contract beds, Subvention beds In 2018, payments of €20.1m (2017: €25.6m) were made in relation to contract beds and nursing home subvention.
These schemes are being phased out having had no new entrants since the Nursing Homes Support Scheme began in 2009.
Expenditure within public facilities Within the public homes in 2018 there was an additional €23.122m (2017: €19.623m) of costs relating to long term care.
These costs related to fixed unit costs and other costs incurred which were in excess of the reimbursed ‘money follows the patient’ rate paid under the Nursing Homes Support Scheme.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Cost of Public Nursing Homes In 2018, the cost of public nursing homes amounted to €354.67m (2017: €340.04m), these costs are gross and the client contribution element amounted to €61.13m (2017: € 60.48m).
The contributions are recognised as income in Long Stay Charges in Statement of Income and Expenditure.
Ancillary State Support
Ancillary State Support is an optional extra feature of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme for people who own property or assets in the State.
Instead of a person paying their assessed contribution for care from their own resources, a person can choose to apply for a Nursing Home Loan, to cover the portion of their contribution, which is based on property or land-based assets within the State.
The HSE then pays that portion of the cost of care on top of the State Support payment.
The loan is paid back to the State following the occurrence of a relevant event e.g. sale of the asset or death of the person.
Repayment of the loan is made to the Revenue Commissioners.
In certain cases, repayment of the loan can be deferred.
This part of the scheme is designed to protect people from having to sell their home during their lifetime.
The total gross amount of Ancillary State Support advised to Revenue as at 31 December 2018 for recoupment from the commencement of the Nursing Homes Support Scheme (where a relevant and non-relevant event has occurred) was €123.525m, representing 6,170 client loans.
As at 31 December 2018 the Revenue Commissioners are currently collecting €123.448m, representing 6,169 clients.
The difference accounts for clients where their Nursing Home loan is not due for repayment such as the Further Deferral option, as mentioned above, and also clients who wish to make a voluntary repayment prior to a relevant event occurring.
The Revenue Commissioners have confirmed that they had received €86.83m of loan repayments paid in full, representing 4,668 client loans.
The total amount of Nursing Home Loan payments made under the Nursing Homes Support Scheme that are outstanding (i.e. where a repayable amount has not been notified to Revenue for collection – relevant event has not occurred), as at 31 December 2018 is €115.945m.
This amount does not include an adjustment for CPI as a relevant event has not yet occurred.
Ancillary State Support details at 31 December are as follows: 2018 €’000
Number of loans
Advised by HSE to Revenue for recoupment
Confirmed by Revenue as being paid*
Not yet advised to Revenue for recoupment
Total Ancillary State Support outstanding
* Amounts confirmed by Revenue does not include part payments and only includes loans fully repaid
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 13 Capital Expenditure
(a) Additions to Fixed Assets 2018 €’000
Additions to Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 15) Land and Buildings – Service Concession*
Additions to Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 15) Land and Buildings – Other
Additions to Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 15) Other than Land and Buildings
Funded from Department of Health Capital Grant Funded from Department of Health Revenue Grant Capitalised – Investment in PPP Service Concession Arrangements*
(b) Analysis of Expenditure Charged to Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure 2018 €’000
Expenditure on HSE projects not resulting in property, plant and equipment additions**
Capitalised Interest – PPP Service Concession Arrangements*
Total expenditure on HSE Projects charged to capital***
Total Capital Expenditure per Statement of Capital Income and Expenditure
Expenditure on HSE’s own assets (Capitalised)
* Relates to Primary Care Centre assets acquired under Public Private Partnership (PPP) service concession arrangements.
** Total capital expenditure not capitalised amounts to €267.0m (2017: €210.5m) *** Capital funded assets and Revenue funded assets are capitalised if the cost exceeds certain value thresholds: €2,000 for computer equipment and €7,000 for all other asset classes.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
(c) Analysis of Capital Income from Other Sources Income from Government Departments and Other Sources in respect of Capital Projects: 2018 €’000
Waterford Hospice Movement Ltd – Waterford Hospital Palliative Care Unit
Department of Education – Children’s Hospital school
University of Limerick – Clinical Education & Research Centre Project Contribution
NUI Galway – Letterkenny General Hospital Medical Education and Training Unit
Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) – energy savings in acute hospitals
Insurance Proceeds – St. Dympna’s Hospital, fire damage
Aontacht Phobail Teoranta – due to HSE on liquidation of subsidiary holding
Letterkenny Hospital Association Ltd – Contribution towards Mental Health Unit.
Irish Hospice Foundation – Design and Dignity grant
Friends of Mid West Regional Hospital – Nenagh Ward Upgrade
Charitable Contribution towards Community Nursing Unit, Tuam, Co. Galway
Insurance Proceeds – Letterkenny General Hospital, flood damage
Cystic Fibrosis Ireland – Cavan General Hospital Paediatric Department Extension
University College Cork
– CUH Paediatric Projects Friends of Bandon Community Hospital
– Day Room Extension to the Hospital University College Cork
– CUH Paediatric Projects Build 4 Life
– CUH Paediatric projects Other Miscellaneous Income
Total Capital Income from Other Sources
Note 14 Proceeds of Disposal of Fixed Asset Account Gross Proceeds of all Disposals in year Less: Net Expenses Incurred on Disposals Net Proceeds of Disposal
The Multi-Annual Delegated Capital sanction 2015-2018 was issued in December 2015 by the Department of Expenditure and Reform.
The Letter of Sanction 2016 for Capital provides for an allowance to re-invest proceeds of sale of fixed assets of up to €6 million in 2018 (2017: €4 million).
The proceeds of the sale of fixed assets during 2018 was below this €6 million threshold and is not considered to be Extra Exchequer Receipts (EERs) and are reflected under Capital and Reserves.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
* Relates to Primary Care Centre (PCC) assets acquired under Public Private Partnership (PPP) service concession arrangements.
The ten PCC sites included within Work in Progress (Land and Buildings) at a value of €137m in 2017 were transferred to Buildings during 2018.
All fourteen PCC sites have reached service commencement.
PCC Assets are not depreciated where they have been acquired or are managed under service concession agreements which guarantee residual useful lives and operating capacity at the end of the concession term that would be equivalent to that of the asset when it was first commissioned.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 16 Inventories 2018 €’000
Laboratory Supplies
Pharmacy Supplies
High Tech Pharmacy Inventories
Household Services
Stationery and Office Supplies
Receivables: Patient Debtors – Long Stay Charges
Prepayments and Accrued Income
Department of Health (DoH)
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Payroll Technical Adjustment
Pension Levy Deductions from Staff/Service Providers
Statutory Redundancy Claim
Local Authorities
Payroll Advances
Voluntary Hospitals – Grant Funding Advances
Sundry Receivables
Medical, Dental and Surgical Supplies
Pharmacy Dispensing Inventories
Blood and Blood Products
Sundries
Note 17 Trade and Other Receivables Receivables: Patient Debtors – Private Facilities in Public Hospitals*
Receivables: Patient Debtors – Public Inpatient Charges
Voluntary Hospitals – National Medical Device Service Contracts
* Private Healthcare Insurance Income In line with the HSE’s accounting policy, the HSE recognises patient income due from private health insurance companies at the time the service is provided.
During 2017, insurance companies commenced deductions from claims made by the HSE relating to the time period between the date of admission and the date the relevant form was signed by the patient.
In line with the HSE’s accounting policy a bad and doubtful debt provision is created in relation to debts outstanding for more than one year.
The HSE is not in a position to quantify the value of such deductions.
No provision has been made in relation to amounts currently under dispute with the insurers which are less than one year old.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 18 Creditors (amounts falling due within one year) 2018 €’000
Finance Leases
Service Concession Liability
Accruals Pay
Taxes and Social Welfare
Department of Public Expenditure and Reform – Single Public Service Pension Scheme
Lottery Grants Payable*
Payables – Revenue
Payables – Capital
Accruals Non Pay – Revenue
Accruals Non Pay – Capital
Sundry Payables
* The HSE administers the disbursement of National Lottery grants for local programmes under the National Lottery’s Health and Welfare Funded Schemes.
The balance represents funding approved but not yet disbursed to grant recipients at year end.
Note 19 Creditors (amounts falling due after more than one year) 2018 €’000
Service Concession Liability
Total Finance Lease obligations
Donations and bequests*
Grant Funding from the State and other bodies
Finance Leases
Liability to the Exchequer in respect of Exchequer Extra Receipts – Other Sales
Note 20 Deferred Income
Deferred Income comprises the following:
Funding from specific capital projects General
* Unspent income arising from donations and bequests where the purposes to which money may be applied has been specified but the related expenditure has not been incurred.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 21 Net Cash Inflow from Operating Activities Deficit for the current year
Capital element of lease payments charged to revenue Less Interest received
Purchase of equipment charged to Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure Finance Costs charged to Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure (Increase) in Inventories (Increase) in Trade and Other Receivables Increase in Creditors (falling due within one year) Revenue Reserves – transfer of Deficit in accordance with Section 33(3) of the Health Act, 2004, as amended Increase/(Decrease) in Creditors (falling due in more than one year) (Decrease) in Deferred Income
Net Cash Inflow from Operating Activities
After one but within five years After five years
Contracted for but not provided in the financial statements Included in the Capital Plan but not contracted for
The HSE has a multi-annual Capital Investment Plan which prioritises expenditure on capital projects in line with goals in the Corporate Plan and the Annual Service Plan.
The contractual commitments identified above are in respect of the total cost of projects for which specific funding budgets have been approved at year end.
These contractual commitments may involve costs in years after 2018 for which budgets have yet to be approved and are therefore estimated.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Operating Lease Commitments Operating lease rentals (charged to the Statement of Revenue Income and Expenditure) 2018 €’000
Motor Vehicles
Equipment
Land and Buildings
The HSE has the following total amounts payable under non-cancellable operating leases split between amounts due: Land and Buildings
In the second to fifth years inclusive
In over five years
Nominal Amount:
Service Concession Arrangement – Primary Care Centres (14 sites bundle)
These commitments incorporate facilities management services, operational and lifecycle costs, for the remaining life of the agreement.
The HSE carried out a significant self-review of tax compliance in respect of 2017 with external specialist tax assistance, which was completed in 2018.
The self-review was conducted on a risk based assessment across all tax heads for which the HSE needs to account.
The underpayment of tax identified in the course of the self-review was set out by means of a Self-Correction and full payment (including interest and penalties) was made to the Revenue Commissioners in September 2018.
The HSE has a dedicated in-house tax team resourced by qualified tax professionals.
The HSE remains committed to meeting its obligations in respect of its compliance with taxation laws.
Note 25 Contingent Liabilities
The HSE is involved in a number of claims involving legal proceedings which may generate liabilities, depending on the outcome of the litigation.
The HSE has insurance cover for professional indemnity, fire and specific all risk claims.
In most cases, such insurance would be sufficient to cover all costs, but this cannot be certain due to indemnity limits and certain policy conditions.
The financial effects of any uninsured contingencies have not been provided in the financial statements.
Patient Private Property Retained Interest Prior to 2005, interest income earned on patients’ private funds was retained by the former Health Boards and used to partially defray the costs incurred in administering approximately 19,000 Patients’ Private Property Accounts.
This action was based on previous legal advice.
Subsequent legal advice taken by the HSE indicated that the Patients’ Private Property Accounts operated under an implied trustee relationship with the patients and as such the HSE was obliged to remit interest earned to those patients.
The lack of available historic private patient property records limits the ability of the HSE to estimate the full potential liability and therefore a partial liability only has been provided for in the HSE's financial statements.
The HSE has set up a Steering Group to actively manage this issue to a satisfactory resolution.
Clinical Indemnity Scheme
Details of the contingent liability in respect of the Clinical Indemnity Scheme are set out in Note 11.
In June 2018, a settlement was agreed between the State and medical consultants arising from an alleged breach of contract in relation to non-implementation of the 2008 Consultants contract.
The settlement provides that 40% of the retrospective remuneration will be paid in 2019 and the balance in 2020.
The HSE’s best current estimate of the liability arising as at 31 December 2018 is circa €198 million.
An interim provision of €68m had been included in the HSE’s financial statements since 2008 and has been reversed in 2018 (see Note 6).
As explained in Note 1 Accounting Policies, no provision is reported in 2018 as the liability is being treated on a receipts and payments basis.
Note 27 Post Balance Sheet Events
No circumstances have arisen or events occurred, between the balance sheet date and the date of approval of the financial statements by the Directorate, which would require adjustment or disclosure in the financial statements.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Note 28 Related Party Transactions In the normal course of business, the Health Service Executive may approve grants and may also enter into other contractual arrangements with undertakings in which Health Service Directorate members are employed or otherwise interested.
The Health Service Executive adopts procedures in accordance with the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform’s Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies, the Ethics in Public Office Act 1995 and the Standards in Public Office Act 2001, in relation to the disclosure of interests of Health Service Directorate members.
These procedures have been adhered to by the Health Service Directorate members and the HSE during the year.
During 2018, no Directorate members held a direct interest within any related parties.
However, one Directorate member sat on the board of the Peter McVerry Trust.
The Directorate Member sat on the board in a medical professional capacity only and is not involved in requesting or approving any payments to these entities.
He resigned on 31 January 2018.
Another person who was a Directorate Member during the year is a Non-Executive Director of Evofem Biosciences Inc.
This research and development company has no commercial and/or financial relationship with the HSE.
Key Management Personnel
All Directorate members are considered to be key management of the HSE.
Overall remuneration in relation to serving Directorate members, including those that were appointed and resigned during the year, is €1.067m (2017: €1.152m).
Directorate remuneration packages comprise of basic pay only.
No allowances, bonuses or perquisites apply to these posts.
However in the year there was a severance payment of €98,558 included in remuneration above, see Note 2.
The Directorate are members of the HSE pension scheme and their pension entitlements do not extend beyond the standard entitlements of the public sector model scheme.
Note 29 Approval of Financial Statements The financial statements were approved by the Directorate on 13 May 2019.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Appendix 1: Revenue Grants and Capital Grants** Analysis of Grants to Outside Agencies in Note 8 and Note 13 Revenue
Age Action Ireland
Age and Opportunity
AIDS Help West
All Ireland Institute of Hospice & Palliative Care (AIIHPC)
Alpha One Foundation
Anchor Treatment Centre
ANEW Support Service
Name of Agency
Acquired Brain Injury Ireland (formerly Peter Bradley Foundation) Active Retirement Ireland
Adapt Community Drugs Team
Aislinn Centre, Kilkenny
Alzheimer Society of Ireland
An Saol Foundation
Ana Liffey Drug Project
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Aras Mhuire Day Care Centre (North Tipperary Community Services)
ARC Cancer Support Centre
Ardee Day Care Centre
Arklow South Wicklow Home Help Service
Arthritis Ireland
Asperger Syndrome Association of Ireland (ASPIRE)
Associated Charities Trust
Association for the Healing of Institutional Abuse (AHIA) (formerly the Aislinn Centre, Dublin).
Asthma Society of Ireland
Ballyfermot Chapelizod Partnership
Ballyfermot Local Drug and Alcohol Task Force CLG
Ballymun Local Drugs Task Force
Ballymun Regional Youth Resource (BRYR)
Ballymun Youth Action Project (YAP)
Ballyphehane and Togher Community Resource Centre
Barretstown Camp
Be Independent Home Care
Name of Agency
Ard Aoibhinn Centre
Association of Parents and Friends of The Mentally Handicapped
Autism Initiatives Group
Beaufort Day Care Centre
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Name of Agency
Beaumont Hospital
Beechfield Care Group
Bergerie Trust
Best Home Care Services
Blakestown and Mountview Youth Initiative (BMYI)
Blanchardstown Local Drugs Task Force
Blanchardstown Youth Service
Bloomfield Health Services
Bodywhys The Eating Disorder Association of Ireland
Bon Secours Sisters
Bray Community Addiction Team
Bray Travellers Group
Cabra Resource Centre
Cairdeas Centre Carlow
Caredoc GP Co-operative
Blanchardstown and Inner City Home Helps
Bluebird Care
Brindley Healthcare
Brothers of Charity Services Ireland
Camphill Communities of Ireland
Cancer Care West Cappagh National Orthopaedic Hospital Capuchins
Care of the Aged, West Kerry
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Name of Agency
Caritas Convalescent Centre
Carlow Social Services
Carlow/Kilkenny Home Care Team
Carnew Community Care Centre
Carrigoran Nursing Home – Day Care Centre
Castle Homecare
Catholic Institute for Deaf People (CIDP)
Central Remedial Clinic
Centres for Independent Living (CIL)
ChildVision (St Joseph’s School For The Visually Impaired)
Chrysalis Community Drug Project
Clarecastle Daycare Centre
Claregalway and District Day Care Centre
Clareville Court Day Centre
Clondalkin Drugs Task Force
Carlow Day Care Centre (Askea Community Services) Carlow Regional Youth Service
Clare Accessible Transport (T/A Clare Bus) Clarecare Ltd Incorporating Clare Social Service Council
CLASP (Community of Lough Arrow Social Project) Clondalkin Addiction Support Programme (CASP) Clondalkin Behavioural Initiative Ltd
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Cluain Training & Enterprise Centre
CLUB 91 (formerly Chez Nous Service), Sligo
Community Games
Community Response, Dublin
Community Substance Misuse Team Limerick
Clonmany Mental Health Association Clontarf Home Help
Co-Action West Cork Cobh General Hospital
Coombe Women’s Hospital
COPE Foundation
COPE Galway
Cork Association for Autism
Cork Foyer Project
Cork Mental Health Association
Cork Social and Health Education Project (CSHEP)
Cúram Altranais Paediatric and
Daisyhouse Housing Association
Delta Centre Carlow
Diabetes Federation of Ireland
Donore Community Development
Down Syndrome Ireland
Drogheda Community Services
Drogheda Homeless Aid Association
Dromcollogher and District Respite Care Centre
Drumkeerin Care Of The Elderly
Drumlin House
Dublin 12 Local Drug and Alcohol Task Force CLG
Darndale Belcamp Drug Awareness
Daughters of Charity
Disability Federation of Ireland (DFI)
Donnycarney/Beaumont Local Care
Drumcondra Home Help
Dublin City University Dublin Dental Hospital 206 Revenue Grants 118,291
Dublin North East Drugs Task Force
Dublin Region Homeless Executive
Dublin West Home Help
Dun Laoghaire Home Help
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Community Addiction Team
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Local Drugs Task Force
Epilepsy Ireland
Farranree Family Centre
Father McGrath Multimedia Centre (Family Resource Centre)
Ferns Diocesan Youth Services (FDYS)
Festina Lente Foundation
Finglas Addiction Support Team
Finglas Cabra Local Drugs and Alcohol Task Force
Forum The North West Connemara Rural Project
Gaelic Athletic Association
Genio Trust
Name of Agency
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Outreach Project Dundalk Outcomers
Edward Worth Library
Enable Ireland
Environmental Protection Agency
Family Carers Ireland
Fettercairn Drug Rehabilitation Project Fighting Blindness Ireland
Fingal Home Care
Finglas Home Help/Care Organisation First Fortnight Ltd
Friedreich’s Ataxia Society in Ireland
Galway Hospice Foundation
Gay Health Network
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Graiguenamanagh Elderly Association
Grantstown Daycare Centre
Guardian Ad Litem and Rehabilitation Office (GALRO)
HADD Family Support Group
Hail Housing Association for Integrated Living
Hazel Hall Nursing Home
Headway the National Association for Acquired Brain Injury
Hesed House
Holy Angels Carlow, Special Needs Day Care Centre
Holy Family School
Holy Ghost Hospital
Hope House
IADP Inter-Agency Drugs Project UISCE
Immigrant Counselling and Psychotherapy (ICAP)
Inchicore Community Drugs Team
Inclusion Ireland
Íontas Arts & Community Resource Centre, Castleblayney
Irish Advocacy Network
Irish Association for Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus (IASBH)
Irish Cancer Society
Irish College of General Practitioners
Irish College of Opthalmogists
Home Instead Senior Care
Incorporated Orthopaedic Hospital of Ireland
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Irish Guide Dogs for the Blind
Irish Haemophilia Society (IHS)
Irish Heart Foundation
Irish Hospice Foundation
Irish Kidney Association (IKA)
Irish Motor Neurone Disease Association
Irish Prison Service
Jack and Jill Children's Foundation
Jigsaw (also known as Headstrong)
K Doc (GP Out of Hours Service)
Irish Society for Autism
Irish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (ISPCC)
Jobstown Assisting Drug Dependency Project (JADD Project) KARE Social Services, Raheny
KARE, Newbridge
Kerry Hospice Foundation
Kerry Parents and Friends Association
Kildare Youth Services (KYS)
Killinarden (KARP)
Kilmaley Voluntary Housing Association
Kingsriver Community
Leitrim Association of People with Disabilities (LAPWD)
Leitrim Development Company
Liberties and Rialto Home Help
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Limerick Social Services Council
Limerick Youth Service Community Training Centre
Liscarne Court Senior Citizens
Little Angels Hostel Letterkenny
Longford Community Resources Ltd
Longford Social Services Committee
Lotamore Family Centre
Lourdes Day Care Centre
Mahon Community Creche
Marian Court Welfare Home Clonmel
McGann Family Home Care Services
Meath County Council
Meath Partnership
Men's Health Development Network
Mental Health Associations (MHAs)
Mid-West Regional Drugs Task Force
Migraine Association of Ireland
Mater Misericordiae University Hospital Ltd Matt Talbot Adolescent Services
Meath Local Sports Partnership
Milford Care Centre
Grants HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
Mounttown Neighbourhood Youth Project
Mulhuddart/Corduff Community Drugs Team
Nasc (The Irish Immigrant Support Centre)
National Childhood Network (NCN)
National Paediatric Hospital
Nazareth House, Mallow
Nazareth House, Sligo
Newport Social Services, Day Care Centre
North Doc Medical Services
North Tipperary Leader Partnership
North West Alcohol Forum
National Suicide Research Foundation (NSRF)
National University of Ireland, Galway (NUIG)
National Youth Council of Ireland
New Ross Community Hospital
North Dublin Inner City Homecare and Home Help Services
North West Parents and Friends Association
Northside Partnership
Northstar Family Support Project
Northwest Hospice
Nurse on Call – Homecare Package
O’Connell Court Residential and Day Care
Offaly Local Development Company
Offaly Travellers Movement
Open Door Day Centre
Order of Malta
Ossory Youth Services
Name of Agency
North West Regional Drugs Task Force
Northside Community Health Initiative (NICHE)
Northside Homecare Services Ltd
Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Crumlin
Parkinson’s Association of Ireland
Our Lady’s Hospice & Care Services (Sisters of Charity) Outhouse Ltd
Peamount Hospital
Pieta House
Post Polio Support Group (PPSG)
Prague House
Positive Options Crisis Pregnancy Agency
Praxis Care Group
Private Home Care, Lucan
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Financial Governance
RADE (Recovery through Art Drama and Education)
Respond! Housing Association
Rialto Community Development
Rialto Community Drugs Team
Rialto Partnership Company
Ringsend and District Response to Drugs
Regional and Local Drugs Task Forces Rehab Group
Rosedale Residential Home
Rotunda Hospital
Royal College of Physicians
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland
Royal Hospital Donnybrook
Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital
Ruhama Women’s Project
Sandymount Home Help
Saoirse Addiction Treatment Center
Salvation Army
Samaritans
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
SAOL Project
Schizophrenia Ireland Lucia Foundation
Shalamar Finiskilin Housing Association
Shankhill Old Folks Association
Shannondoc Ltd (GP Out Of Hours Service)
Simon Communities of Ireland
Sisters of Charity
Sisters of Charity St Mary's Centre for the Blind and Visually Impaired
Sisters of Mercy
Skibereen Community and Family Resource Centre
Sligo Family Centre
Sophia Housing Association
South West Mayo Development Company
Southern Gay Health Project
Southside Partnership
Spinal Injuries Ireland
Spiritan Asylum Services Initiative (SPIRASI)
St Aengus Community Action Group
SCJMS/Muiriosa Foundation
SDC South Dublin County Partnership (formerly Dodder Valley Partnership) Senior Citizens Concern Ltd
Sligo Sport and Recreation Partnership Snug Community Counselling
Society of St Vincent De Paul (SVDP)
South Doc GP Co-operative
South Dublin Senior Citizens Club South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital South West Counselling Centre
St Aidan’s Services
Revenue
Grants
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
St Andrew’s Resource Centre
St Bridget's Day Care Centre
St Carthage’s House Lismore
St Christopher’s Services, Longford
St Dominic’s Community Response Project
St Fiacc’s House, Graiguecullen
St Gabriel’s School and Centre
St Hilda’s Services For The Mentally Handicapped, Athlone
St Colman’s Care Centre
St Cronan’s Association
St Francis Hospice
St James’ Hospital
St James’ Hospital, Jonathan Swift Hostels St John Bosco Youth Centre
St John of God Hospitaller Services
St John’s Hospital
St Joseph’s Foundation
St Joseph’s Home For The Elderly
St Joseph’s Home, Kilmoganny, Co. Kilkenny
St Kevin’s Home Help Service
St Laurence O’ Toole SSC
St Lazarian's House, Bagenalstown
St Luke’s Home
St Michael’s Hospital, Dun Laoghaire
St Michael’s House
St Michael’s Day Care Centre
St Monica’s Community Development Committee
St Monica’s Nursing Home
St Nicholas Special School
St Patrick’s Hospital/Marymount
St Patrick’s Special School
St. Paul’s Child and Family Care Centre 3,093 3,093 3,052
St Patrick’s Centre, Kilkenny (Sisters of Charity)
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2018
Stella Maris Facility
Stillorgan Home Help
Tabor House, Navan
Tabor Lodge
Talbot Grove Treatment Centre
Tallaght Rehabilitation Project
Tallaght Travellers Youth Service
The Avalon Centre, Sligo
The Beeches Residential Home
The Birches Alzheimer Day Centre
The College of Anaesthetists of Ireland
The Eating Disorder Centre Cork
The Irish Forum for Global Health (IFGH)
The Irish Men’s Sheds Association (IMSA)
The Nightingale Placement Agency (TNPA)
The Oasis Centre
Sunbeam House Services
Tallaght Home Help
Tallaght University Hospital
Teach Mhuire Day Care Centre
Temple Street Children’s University Hospital Templemore Day Care Centre Terenure Home Care Service Ltd
The Edmund Rice International Heritage Centre
The Killarney Asylum Seekers Initiative (KASI)
The Paddy McGrath Housing Project (formerly Aids Fund Housing)
The Sexual Health Centre
Third Age
Threshold National Housing Organisation
Thurles Community Social Services
Tipperary Association for Special Needs
Tipperary Hospice Movement
Tolka River Project
Tralee International Resource Centre
Tralee Women's Forum
Trinity College Dublin
Tullow Day Care Centre
TUSLA Child & Family Agency
University College Cork
University of Limerick
Valentia Community Hospital
Village Counselling Service
Transfusion Positive Transgender Equality Network Ireland Traveller Groups and Organisations
Trinity Community Care
University College Dublin
Waterford and South Tipperary Community Youth Service
Waterford Association for the Mentally Handicapped
Waterford Community Childcare
Waterford Hospice Movement
Well Woman Clinics
Western Region Drugs Task Force
Western Traveller and Intercultural Development Association
Westgate Foundation
Wexford Homecare Service
Wexford Local Development
Wicklow Community Care Home Help Services
Wicklow Hospice Foundation
Windmill Therapeutic Training Unit
Youth Work Ireland
Westdoc (GP Out Of Hours Service) Western Care Association
Care Compassion
Trust Learning
Our population changes from Census 2011 to Census 2016
Life expectancy has increased by 0.2 years for women and 0.9 years for men
more people (whole time equivalents (WTEs)) employed
more women (aged 50-64) had a mammogram through BreastCheck
Statement from the Director General
Our Health Service
Our Corporate Plan
Values in Action
Our Organisation
Our Population
Listening to our Service Users
Building a Better Health Service Safeguarding and Protection
Excellence in Delivering our Health Services
Service Delivery
Healthcare Activity in 2017
Health and Wellbeing
Community Healthcare
Primary Care
Mental Health
Disability Services
Older Persons’ Services
Community Healthcare Organisations
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
Pre-Hospital Emergency Care
Annual Energy Efficiency Report
Part II
Financial Governance
Operating and Financial Overview 2017 Governance Statement and Directorate Members’ Report Statement on Internal Control
Comptroller and Auditor General Report for Presentation to the Oireachtas Financial Statements
Notes to the Financial Statements
Appendices
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Statement from the Director General
Statement from the Director General At the time of writing, recent events have brought the policy of Open Disclosure to the forefront, with Government now introducing legislation at the earliest opportunity.
The HSE will work with Government and patients and staff interests to fully and effectively implement that legislation.
Corporate Plan 2015-2017 2017 was the last year of our Corporate Plan 2015-2017.
This plan set out ambitious goals and targets for us to achieve in developing a first-rate service, available to people where and when they need it.
Some highlights and achievements can be seen throughout this Annual Report.
Our values of Care, Compassion, Trust and Learning are important to us.
Values in Action is working with staff to bring these values into their everyday work.
The case for change and shifting the balance
Over the last few years we have seen significant change for our health services.
In 2017 Sláintecare, the cross party Oireachtas Committee report on the Future of Healthcare, was published in May. We welcome the potential longer term stability that Sláintecare brings.
We are working with Government to develop an implementation plan for Sláintecare.
This has contributed in no small way to many of the challenges we face today including emergency department overcrowding and gaining access to many of our services.
Over 4.7 million people live in Ireland, an increase of almost 170,000 people since 2011.
Modelling forecasts tell us that people aged over 65 will increase by nearly 110,000 in the next five years. While this is great news, a large proportion of this older age group now lives with two or more chronic conditions, making many of them more vulnerable and frail.
Building a sustainable health service driven by quality and safety
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Statement from the Director General
Many health and social care systems around the world are under increasing pressure due to growing and ageing populations, increases in chronic disease, rising costs of specialist drugs and therapies, and slow funding recovery from the 2008 global financial crisis.
Our health service is no different and so there is an onus on us to drive efficiencies, productivity and value from our existing funding bases – but those which are informed by national policy so that we do not lose sight of the need to deliver best health outcomes, while still improving people’s experience of using our services.
This will be a particular focus for us in 2018.
As part of reaching our aim to become a world class health service, we are on a journey of improvement and change, with strategic approaches being developed and prioritised to meet the needs of our patients and service users.
Our National Patient Safety Programme is ensuring that national safety priorities and initiatives are being implemented across our health services.
As part of the development of A Future Together – Building a Better GP and Primary Care Service, MyGP survey was undertaken which has helped us deepen our understanding of patient priorities towards improving primary care and GP services.
The development of a new, modernised GP contract is key to developing a more comprehensive and accessible primary care service.
The first ever National Patient Experience Survey was undertaken in May with patients from 40 hospitals across Ireland invited to participate.
With over 13,700 respondents, it is the largest survey on patients’ care in Ireland.
The results of this survey are very important and will influence the way we deliver our services.
The survey told us that 79% of people said that their stay in hospital was good or very good.
83% who answered said that they had confidence and trust in the hospital staff that treated them.
82% said that they were treated with respect and dignity.
However we have more to do.
36% said that they were not involved in decisions about their care as much as they would have liked to be.
49% said that they could not always find a member of staff to talk to about their worries.
The Patient Narrative Project is also putting the service user/patient voice at the centre of the design and delivery of healthcare through hearing the stories of people who use our health services and using this information to inform how we design our services.
The programme uses the opportunities that occur every day for every health professional to support patients to make a lifestyle change through a brief intervention and reduce the risk of chronic disease.
Progress continues to be made in areas such as, for example, the establishment of the National Women and Infants’ Health Programme and implementation of the National Maternity Strategy; the Healthy Ireland Framework; Connecting for Life – Ireland’s National Strategy to Reduce Suicide; the eHealth and electronic health records programme; the development of a long-awaited new architecture for ICT and logistics; implementation of the integrated care programmes.
We have taken considerable steps towards improvements in staff training and development initiatives since 2012 including the restoration of training budgets, the introduction of Staff Engagement Surveys and the Staff Forum, and the new Leadership Academy.
These initiatives provide an excellent platform to further support all of our staff.
One of our priorities over the past number of years was putting forward a case to seek an increase in capital funding for the health services in order to progress key projects.
The National Development Plan 2018-2027 (Project Ireland 2040) acknowledges the importance of these projects which include, for example 2,500 beds across the system as part of the capacity review and other hospital and community supports.
As we now move towards implementation of Sláintecare, the next number of years will be critically important for our health services.
Our values of Care, Compassion, Trust and Learning will continue to guide us in this journey, embedded by our staff every day in every healthcare setting.
This Annual Report highlights challenges ahead, services provided and examples of progress made in 2017 across a range of areas including health and wellbeing, primary care, mental health, disability services, older persons’ services, pre-hospital emergency care and acute hospital care.
Thank you
I wish to thank all members of the Directorate and Leadership Team, the Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs), Hospital Groups and particularly all their staff, who give so much on a day to day basis, for their dedication and commitment throughout the year.
Director General
Health Service Executive
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Our Health Service
Mission
People in Ireland are supported by health and social care services to achieve their full potential
We will try to live our values every day and will continue to develop them 
People in Ireland can access safe, compassionate and quality care when they need it 
People in Ireland can be confident that we will deliver the best health outcomes and value through optimising our resources
Care
The Corporate Plan 2015-2017 sets out our aim to improve our health service over a three year period.
Our aim is to develop a first-rate service, available to people where and when they need it.
Our vision is to develop a healthier Ireland with a high quality health service valued by all.
This vision is accompanied by a mission statement that outlines how this vision can be realised.
Underpinning our plan are the values: Care, Compassion, Trust and Learning.
These values are critical to how decisions are made in delivering a health service that all can be proud of.
The plan sets out five goals, along with the actions required to achieve them.
The actions associated with these goals are reflected in each of our annual National Service Plans for the period of our Corporate Plan.
Our Annual Reports show progress that is made in implementing these goals.
Over the following pages, both achievements and challenges over the three year period are outlined.
Compassion
Trust
Learning
Promote health and wellbeing as part of everything we do so that people will be healthier
Provide fair, equitable and timely access to quality, safe health services that people need
Foster a culture that is honest, compassionate, transparent and accountable
Engage, develop and value our workforce to deliver the best possible care and services to the people who depend on them
Manage resources in a way that delivers best health outcomes, improves people’s experience of using the service and demonstrates value for money
Our Corporate Plan sets out actions and targets to be achieved over the years 2015-2017.
Some highlights and achievements from this period are set out below.
Other details can be seen throughout sections of this Annual Report.
Birth rates
The number of live births has been falling year-on-year since 2009 and in 2016 the number of registered births was 63,397.
Despite reductions in the number of births in recent years, the fertility rate in Ireland, at 1.82, remains the 2nd highest in the EU, behind France.
Life expectancy and health of the population
Life expectancy in Ireland has increased by almost two and a half years since 2005 and is now above the EU average, with women at just over 83 years and men at 79.3 years.
The greatest gains in life expectancy have been achieved in the older age groups, reflecting significant reductions in major causes of death.
Age standardised mortality rates from diseases of the circulatory system, which remain the major cause of death (30% of all deaths), have declined over the last decade as has mortality across most principal causes of death.
Diseases of the circulatory system fell by 28.4% between 2007 and 2016 and cancer mortality rates decreased by 9.9% over the same period.
There have been improvements seen in survival rates from breast, cervical, colon and rectal cancer in the last 15 years.
However, with the exception of rectal cancer, 5-year net survival rates are lower in Ireland than the average for OECD countries, where data is available.
Chronic disease
Approximately three quarters of deaths in Ireland are due to three chronic diseases – cancer, cardiovascular disease and respiratory diseases.
From 2017 to 2022, it is estimated there will be more than a 17% increase in the number of adults aged 65 years and over with two or more chronic conditions.
Approximately 86% of people aged 65 years and over have one or more chronic diseases, and 65% of people aged 65 years and over live with multi-morbidity (two or more chronic conditions) (The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing (TILDA), wave1, 2010).
These statistics and trends provide us with an understanding of the demographic change and the challenges we face which have implications for future planning and health service delivery.
Through monitoring the performance of the health system we will continue to plan so that resources available to health and social care are targeted towards providing care and support for those patients and clients most in need, and ensuring that these services are delivered efficiently and effectively, consistent with best available evidence.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Listening to our Service Users
Listening to our Service Users We are actively ensuring that we listen to the views and opinions of patients and service users and consider them in how services are planned, delivered and improved.
A number of areas were progressed during the year to promote patient and service user involvement across our health services.
What you told us
Building a Better GP and Primary Care Service
The MyGP survey was undertaken to help us deepen our understanding of patient priorities and improve primary care and GP services.
Over 6,000 people responded, with very positive results including: •
91% of patients indicated they were satisfied with their GP service.
61% reported satisfaction with access to their GP service.
77% were satisfied with the health information provided.
81% found staff to be suitably discreet.
This feedback, combined with the learning from other stakeholder engagements, formed the basis for the report A Future Together – Building a Better GP and Primary Care Service which will inform the development of a more person-centred primary care service.
National Patient Experience Survey The first ever National Patient Experience Survey was undertaken in May with 26,635 patients from 40 hospitals across Ireland invited to participate.
With a response rate of 51% (13,706 respondents), it is the largest survey on patients’ care in Ireland.
The results were launched in December.
Overall:
• 79% of respondents described the admission to hospital phase as good or very good. •
However, 16% of respondents rated their experience as fair to poor.
49% said they could not always find a member of staff to talk to about their worries or fears.
36% said that they were not involved in decisions about their care as much as they would have liked to be.
The survey underlines the fact that access remains the biggest challenge facing our health service.
Measuring and analysing patients’ experience is essential to realising what is working well and what needs to change.
In the HSE’s response to the survey, Listening, Responding and Improving, a commitment was given to the implementation of a programme of work designed to improve patient experience across acute hospital services with an action plan and a reporting structure in place to provide assurance that we are making a real difference for patients across Ireland.
Areas of focus include: •
Improving wait times and communication with patients in EDs.
Ensuring that patients have the opportunity to talk to members of staff about their concerns.
Promoting clinical communication among healthcare professionals.
Improving written information on what to do after leaving hospital.
Promoting and sustaining a culture of dignity and respect for patients.
Maternity care complaints
A review of maternity care complaints was published which examined patient complaints made concerning care experienced between 1975 and 2015.
The review process has provided important learning for maternity services in Ireland.
The information it has generated, insights into patient experiences, and findings it has made, is assisting us in improving how we provide maternity care in Ireland.
Office of the Confidential Recipient The Office of the Confidential Recipient is a national service, receiving concerns/complaints in an independent capacity, and has dealt with over 500 formal concerns/ complaints from across the country since its establishment in December 2014.
In 2017, the total number of formal concerns/complaints received by the Confidential Recipient was 196, a slight reduction on 2016.
The type of concerns raised include safeguarding, client placement/planning, access to equipment, level of staff to support client, financial charges, staff behaviour, and safety of care.
Listening to our Service Users Further information and contact details for the Confidential Recipient can be found at www.hse.ie.
Partnering with Patients, Service Users and Families Working together
Partnering with patients, service users and families in the planning, design and delivery of services brings unique patient insights and perspectives to deliberations and decisions, ensures that resources are utilised to meet the needs of patients and helps to build trust and confidence in the health service.
Patient Narrative Project
The Patient Narrative Project positions the patient/service user voice centrally in the design and delivery of healthcare through hearing the stories of people using our health services.
In essence, the project wants to progress and instil the philosophy of ‘patients as partners’ in health.
Phase 1 of the Patient Narrative Project was launched and has delivered a service user-developed definition of integrated care.
In summary, people want to be at the centre of all discussions and decisions about their healthcare, and for this healthcare to be built around them and their world.
This is called ‘person-centred co-ordinated care’.
Phase 2 of the Patient Narrative Project is Your Voice Matters.
It is a survey that will provide a high volume of patient experience feedback on a continual basis in the form of statistical data, backed up with explanatory narrative in the words of patients and service users themselves.
It allows patients to tell us how we are doing in the journey towards person-centred co-ordinated care – a framework that asks ‘Are we there yet?’ The benefit of Your Voice Matters is that it allows for a more detailed insight into patient and service user experience, helping us to understand how well we are delivering on what we have already been told our patients and service users want.
An analysis of the results of the pilot survey, which ran until October, is underway with results available in early 2018.
Proactive work continues to promote and facilitate such partnership, including: •
The National Patient Forum is made up of representatives from national advocacy groups, patients and carers.
During the year the forum engaged with the HSE on a number of projects, including the eHealth programme, the Leadership Academy, integrated care, and transforming urgent and emergency care.
Patients for Patient Safety Ireland comprises people who experienced serious harm or death of a loved one in the Irish healthcare system, as well as healthcare staff.
The group is part of the global World Health Organisation (WHO) network and works collaboratively with the HSE to improve patient safety.
A National Patient Representative Panel was established.
Members of the panel are patients, service users, carers and family members and representatives participate in focus groups, steering and working groups and provide an input into a wide range of programmes and projects.
During the year, the HSE worked in partnership with the All Ireland Institute of Hospice and Palliative Care to capture the individual stories of patients, family members and carers who have used palliative care services.
Within mental health services •
The National Framework for Recovery in Mental Health 2018-2020 was launched.
This framework was co-produced with service users, family members, carers and experts by experience.
Through implementation of Partnership for Change – Report of the Mental Health Reference Group, Area Leads for mental health engagement were appointed to each CHO and 20 peer support workers were appointed.
Further information on these initiatives can be seen on page 50 of this Annual Report.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Listening to our Service Users
Pictured at the mental health nursing conference were Liz Roche, Area Director,
National Lead for Mental Health
Nursing, Minister of State for
Mental Health and Older People,
Jim Daly TD, and Mary Wynne,
Nursing and Midwifery
Services Director.
Workshops and conferences
A number of workshops and conferences were held during the year with a specific focus on the service user experience.
These included: •
Patient narrative workshops to deliver the patient/ service user perspective on what should be expected from person-centred, co-ordinated care in the Irish health service.
A national mental health nursing conference on embedding recovery principles in psychiatric/ mental health nursing practice.
This collaborative event provided opportunities for families, service users and advocates to present personal stories and experiences to reduce stigma and promote mental health and wellbeing.
A number of integrated care programme and national clinical care programme workshops, including workshops on older persons’ services and diabetes care.
There were 8,281 complaints recorded and examined by complaints officers under the Health Act 2004, a decrease of 877 (9.5%) on the number recorded in 2016.
Of the total number of complaints received, 6,298 or 76% were dealt with within 30 working days.
Table 2: HSE complaints received and % dealt with within 30 working days
No. of complaints received
No. and % dealt with within 30 working days
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Voluntary hospitals and agencies In 2017, there were 13,214 compliments recorded, although many go unrecorded.
There were 11,356 complaints recorded and examined by complaints officers, a decrease of 1,453 (11.3%) on the number recorded in 2016.
Of the total number of complaints received, 10,040 or 88% were dealt with within 30 working days.
Listening to our Service Users
Other patient and service user feedback Informing how we will improve our services The comments below reflect some of the communication received from patients and service users in relation to their own experience of our health services.
All feedback, both positive and negative, is used to actively progress improvements as part of building a safe, efficient, person-centred service.
Doctors and nurses always treated me with dignity and respect, despite their heavy workload
Before leaving the hospit en giv n I wish I had bee a printed sheet with all the information I should e know for aftercare onc e hom got
I From the time a bed was allocated on the ward it took hours to be moved there
I will never be able to express fully my gratitude for those that were present in the operating theatre that night; a team that I later learned had been on duty all day and had been sleeping when they got the call to come back on duty to perform the operation on me.
Surgeons, midwives, porters, anaesthetists and students – they held my hand, they explained every step they took with the utmost patience, they reassured me throughout and they comforted me.
The doctor took time to answer my questions.
I felt that I could ask him anything about my condition
dards
The household staff who gave me my meals treated me with dignity, and talked to me and expressed interest and concern about how I was feeling
I was happy during my stay
Waiting time in the emergency department is terrible and unacceptable
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Listening to our Service Users
Table 3: Complaints received by category 2017 Category
HSE (excluding voluntary hospitals and agencies)
Voluntary hospitals and agencies
Access
Dignity and respect
Safe and effective care
Communication and information
Privacy
Improving health
Accountability
Clinical judgement
Vexatious complaints
Nursing homes/ residential care for older people (65 and over)
Nursing homes/ residential care (aged 64 and under)
Pre-school inspection services
Trust in care
Children first
Safeguarding vulnerable persons (new 2016)
Participation Data source: HSE Quality Assurance and Verification Note: Some complaints contain multiple issues and therefore fall under more than one category
Complaints under Parts 2 and 3 of the Disability Act 2005 744 complaints were received under Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 in relation to a child’s assessment of need for disability services, a reduction of 34%.
Fourteen complaints were received under Part 3 of the Act, access to buildings and services for people with disabilities. HSELive
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Building a Better Health Service
Building a Better Health Service
As part of reaching our aim to become a world class health service available to people where and when they need it, the health service is on a journey of improvement and change, with strategic approaches being developed and prioritised to meet the needs of our patients and service users.
Improving the quality and safety of our services
A key focus in improving quality and safety is listening to the views and opinions of patients and service users and considering them in how services are planned and delivered.
Details of this can be seen in the Listening to our Service Users section of this Annual Report.
A three-year National Patient Safety Programme has been established which, alongside the Framework for Improving Quality in our Health Service, is driving the implementation of national safety priorities and initiatives across all parts of the health system.
Targeting safety initiatives through clinical leadership •
The number of sepsis associated hospital deaths has fallen by 30% over the past five years.
The decrease is due to better recognition and treatment in hospitals nationally.
New educational and support tools have also been launched to further support clinicians in sepsis management.
Phase 3 of the national Pressure Ulcers to Zero (PUTZ) campaign is being rolled out, with a 49% reduction in ward acquired pressure ulcers across the 23 participating teams.
Hand hygiene is the single most effective measure that healthcare workers, patients and the public can undertake to prevent HCAIs.
Hand hygiene compliance rates are at their highest ever levels (90.8%).
Work is on-going with healthcare facilities to further improve compliance rates by implementing action plans including education, training and re-audit programmes.
To promote safe, rational and cost effective medicines management three masterclasses were held, attended by nurses, midwives, doctors and pharmacists from all settings.
Multi-disciplinary teams from 27 hospitals participated in a quality improvement collaborative.
This resulted in 35,000 more patients getting the most appropriate blood clot prevention for them, building knowledge and skills in blood clot prevention and quality improvement.
To support safe decontamination practice, the National Decontamination Safety Programme published guidance on the transport of reusable medical devices, decontamination of ultrasound equipment and design and equipping of endoscope decontamination units.
The Central Decontamination Unit team in Our Lady’s Hospital (Navan), in collaboration with the national programme, became the first hospital to achieve external accreditation to ISO 13485 with the National Standards Authority of Ireland.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Building a Better Health Service
New national standards for quality and safety in occupational health services were launched to promote consistency of service delivery throughout the country.
The standards are grouped according to five themes – worker-centred care, safe and effective care, leadership and governance, workforce planning and the use of information – and can be seen at www.hse.ie/workwell.
Healthcare audits provide assurance that services delivered meet statutory obligations in accordance with best practice.
Four summary national healthcare audit reports were published, relating to key safety issues such as the communication of patient critical information and the detection of and response to rapid deterioration in patients.
MEASUREMENT FOR QUALITY
Schwarz Rounds offer healthcare staff time and space to reflect on the impact of their work, gaining knowledge that will help in caring for patients.
A new collaboration was announced between the HSE and the Point of Care Foundation to establish rounds in 30 sites through formal service level agreement.
Keeping ourselves up-to-date on good practice and sharing learning are key to improving quality.
A series of one hour webinars continued during the year, structured to build a firm grounding in the essentials of quality improvement. •
New guidance was published to assist new and existing healthcare boards in using practices to drive safety, quality and a culture of personcentredness.
A Board’s Role in Improving Quality and Safety presents a practical guide by providing examples of leading practices, resources and recommended reading.
Two groups of staff from a variety of disciplines undertook an accredited national programme to enhance cultures of person-centredness.
The programme aims to develop facilitation skills and knowledge to lead on organisational culture change.
The HSE Best Practice Guidance for Mental Health Services was launched and includes a self-assessment framework.
This best practice guidance will support and guide further quality improvements within mental health services (see also page 50 of this Annual Report).
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
STAFF ENGAGEMENT
USE OF IMPROVEMENT METHODS
Building capacity and capability to improve quality and safety within CHOs, Hospital Groups and the National Ambulance
Service (NAS) •
The guide is a self-assessment tool that helps staff to self-assess and identify areas for learning and development and is structured around the six drivers of the Framework for Improving Quality in our Health Service.
The guide is accessible at www.qualityimprovement.ie.
Work continued, in conjunction with disability services, to support residential disability services in improving the quality of services and performance against Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) standards.
Implementing national standards and policies •
The National Standards for the Conduct of Reviews of Patient Safety Incidents were launched, promoting a person-centred approach to the review of patient safety incidents, supporting and communicating with service users and their families during any review, and ensuring reviews are completed within clear timelines.
Work continues on implementing the national open disclosure policy and guidelines.
Building a Better Health Service
Risk management is the concern of everyone and is embedded both as part of normal day to day business and to inform the strategic and operational planning and performance cycle.
The HSE Integrated Risk Management Policy 2017 was published, setting out the policy and guidance by which the HSE manages risk.
Models of care have been designed for rehabilitation medicine, rheumatic and musculoskeletal disorders, integrated care for type 2 diabetes and eating disorders.
A number of guidelines, pathways, practice guides and clinical decision tools were developed, including:
Our policy is that all safety incidents are identified, reported and investigated.
A new Incident Management Framework is being launched, replacing the safety incident management policy (2014).
The framework is designed to provide services with a practical and proportionate approach to the management of incidents.
It seeks to place a particular emphasis on supporting the needs of service users, families and staff in the aftermath of an incident.
Providing care in a more integrated way
The national clinical and integrated care programmes have embarked on a long-term programme of work to clinically redesign the delivery of health and social care services to improve and standardise patient care across all healthcare settings.
Bereavement care following maternal death within a hospital setting
Antimicrobial safety in pregnancy and lactation
Antimicrobial prescribing
Minimum standards for acute surgical assessment units (ASAU) in Ireland
Use of parenteral nutrition in neonatal and paediatric units
Integrated care for spinal cord injury
Maternity sepsis support tool
National Quality Assurance and Improvement System (NQAIS) clinical database tool.
The national clinical programmes also piloted or supported the establishment of a number of improvement initiatives, including: -
Musculoskeletal physiotherapy triage delivered in 18 sites
International Conference on Integrated Care The 17th International Conference on Integrated Care was co-hosted by the HSE and the International Foundation of Integrated Care in May.
This year’s conference was unique in that, for the first time, it was awarded Patients Included Charter Status, having fulfilled all obligations around accessibility, patient involvement and virtual participation.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Building a Better Health Service • -
ASAU pilots in two proof of concept sites
Over 200 clinicians trained to deliver behavioural family therapy support to families and individuals affected by psychosis
Work is continuing to implement integrated care programmes (ICPs) for patient flow, older persons, prevention and management of chronic disease, and children: -
Improving access and improving the patient experience during the winter period
The aim of the Winter Initiative 2016-2017 was to identify and focus on specific measures designed to address the anticipated surge in health service activity in both hospitals and the community during the winter months.
The plan contained a number of key measures both in terms of hospital avoidance and in safe and timely discharge, and was implemented following a robust planning process undertaken with all key stakeholders.
While not all targets were met, a number of positive outcomes were achieved:
• The winter initiative provided for the expansion of CITs in Dublin North, Louth/Meath, Galway/Roscommon and South Tipperary.
•  997 additional home care packages were provided.
•  658 additional transitional care beds were available.
•  Funding to discharge 18 complex discharges was provided and a total of 27 discharges were enabled.
•  Delayed discharges were reduced to below 500.
•  113 additional acute beds were opened.
•  4,458 patients were supplied with aids and appliances to facilitate their safe and timely discharge.
As part of the Winter Initiative 2017-2018, measures identified included:
• Funding to support a number of complex discharges.
• An increase in home and transitional care funding to assist with efficient discharging from acute hospitals.
• Funding to support the Under the Weather influenza campaign.
Despite increases of almost 3% in ED attendances, and increases of almost 6% in ED attendances and admissions for persons aged 75 years and over, by year end reported 8am trolleys were reduced by 2.6% on the previous year.
Building a Better Health Service
Developing nursing and midwifery services •
Education and support has been provided to increase to 990 the number of nurses and midwives registered as nurse prescribers, with 320 nurses and midwives now authorised to prescribe ionising radiation (x-ray).
Quality care metrics, designed to measure the care provided by nurses and midwives using real time data, were finalised for the areas of public health and community nursing, mental health, intellectual disability, older persons, children, acute services and midwifery.
125 candidate advanced nurse practitioners are undertaking education programmes with targeted areas of practice being unscheduled care, rheumatology, respiratory and older persons.
Implementation of the Caring Behaviours Assurance System for Ireland (CBAS-I) continued, with the programme delivered in Portiuncula University Hospital and commenced in University Maternity Hospital Limerick.
The Framework for Staffing and Skill Mix for Nursing is being piloted in three sites (Beaumont Hospital, Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital and St. Columcille’s Hospital), measuring patient outcomes, nurse staffing, nurse workload and the working environment.
New national education programmes for nurses were developed and implemented in critical care nursing, anaesthetic recovery room nursing and unscheduled care nursing.
Implementation of a National Frailty Education Programme for nurses and health professionals was supported with 107 frailty facilitators completing the Facilitator’s Development Programme and 430 healthcare professionals completing a Fundamentals of Frailty Education Programme.
Health service improvement
The Programme for Health Service Improvement (PHSI) is supporting the building of a better health service for the population of Ireland.
It is implementing a strategic and programmatic approach to delivering tangible, sustainable change and improvement across the health service as we evolve to adapt for the future.
A number of major programmes are in place covering service design/ improvement, service delivery and enabling services which have a robust governance and support structure in place.
The programmes include:
Implementation of the CHOs, Hospital Groups, NAS and enabling services
Transformation of the national centre
Quality assurance and quality improvement
National clinical and integrated care programmes
Primary care and PCRS improvement
eHealth Ireland, including the electronic health record (EHR)
Finance reform
HR and communications improvement.
Programme management offices have been established in CHOs and Hospital Groups as well as in the national centre, NAS, and in a number of enabling functions to support and enable the sustainable implementation of these strategic and service priorities.
A project management methodology and a training course have been developed, and a robust online management tracking and management tool is in place to actively support these programmes and provide reporting capability as required.
Developing a performing and accountable health service
To build a better health service, we must review and assess how we are achieving against the objectives we set ourselves.
Our focus is on improving the performance of our services and our accountability for those services.
Our primary responsibility is to the Minister for Health but the HSE also has a range of other accountability obligations to the Oireachtas and to its Regulators.
Our Performance and Accountability Framework 2017 makes explicit the responsibilities of managers in relation to the four equally important domains of the National Scorecard which are Access to services, the Quality and Safety of those services, doing this within the Financial Resources available and by effectively harnessing the efforts of the Workforce.
Implementation of the Performance and Accountability Framework focuses attention on the delivery of services relative to the anticipated level of performance and drives necessary improvements in performance which are warranted.
The Framework also provides for the public reporting of services.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Safeguarding and Protection
Safeguarding vulnerable people
In 2014, the HSE published its safeguarding policy for older people and people with a disability who, as a result of physical or intellectual impairment, may be at risk of abuse.
Safeguarding Vulnerable Persons at Risk of Abuse – National Policy and Procedures sets out a number of principles to promote the welfare of vulnerable people and safeguard them from abuse.
Safeguarding and Protection Teams, established in each of the nine CHOs since 2015, manage community referrals and safeguarding concerns within service settings.
All safeguarding concerns are treated in confidence and, as much as possible, are handled in a way that respects the wishes of the person at risk.
The service is focused on the client, aimed at the safety and wellbeing of the person at risk, while providing support to stop the abusive behaviour.
A review commenced of the Safeguarding Vulnerable Persons at Risk of Abuse – National Policy and Procedures.
The review involved widespread consultation with key stakeholders through formal submissions and focus groups.
The outcome of the review is due to be finalised at the end of Quarter 2, 2018.
Safeguarding data from each of the nine CHOs was published.
This information, for 2016, represents the first year of data collection and shows that there was a total of 7,884 safeguarding concerns managed (4,749 relating to adults aged 18-64 years, 3,029 relating to adults over 65 years and, of these, 1,221 relating to adults over 80 years).
Findings from a Red C nationwide public opinion survey in 2016 on attitudes and awareness of abuse of vulnerable persons were published.
The survey sought to understand perceptions around and treatment of vulnerable adults in Ireland.
The findings from the survey can be viewed on www.safeguardingcommittee.ie which resulted in the roll-out of a public awareness campaign.
21,000 staff in HSE and HSE funded agencies were trained in safeguarding.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
The National Safeguarding Committee was established to support the safeguarding agenda and is a multi-agency and inter-sectoral body working collaboratively with one common goal – to ensure that adults who may be vulnerable are safeguarded.
In 2016, the National Safeguarding Committee Strategic Plan 2017-2021 was published, which will guide the work of the committee for the next five years.
Reports from the National Safeguarding Committee are available on www.safeguardingcommittee.ie.
The National Safeguarding Office oversees the implementation, monitoring, review and on-going evaluation of the safeguarding policy.
The Office compiles data, undertakes analysis and publishes an annual data report.
Further details on the HSE safeguarding service including reports are on www.hse.ie/safeguarding.
Public awareness campaign…
The aim of the campaign was to encourage greater vigilance among the state, financial and nursing home sectors as well as among family members and carers to recognise and tackle abuse of vulnerable adults.
Its focus was on the subtle nature of abuse such as locking an older person in a room while out, over medicating a person to calm them or quietly taking money from an older person to cover care costs, all acts of abuse of people’s liberties and rights.
Safeguarding and Protection
Assisted DecisionMaking
The Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 was enacted to put in place a modern legislative framework to support decisionmaking and to maximise a person’s capacity to make decisions.
While the Act has not fully commenced, the HSE is doing a number of things to prepare staff and services for its full commencement: •
A national steering group has been established made up of staff, service users and expert advisors to prepare guidance for what the Act will mean in day to day practice.
A national consultation process took place.
A training and education programme is being prepared and a website developed.
The Act is a reforming piece of legislation which abolishes the previous Wards of Court system.
Essentially this means that those with difficulty making decisions about their finances, healthcare, living arrangements etc. will be helped, where possible, to make these decisions for themselves or where this is not possible, a representative will be appointed by the Circuit Court.
Assisted Decision-Making in Action John sustained a traumatic brain injury and now lives in a residential service.
It was decided to make him a Ward of Court.
As a Ward of Court, John was unable to make financial or medical decisions and could not travel without the approval of the court.
However once the Assisted Decision-Making Act commences, John will be discharged from Wardship.
While he still may require support for certain decisions of a financial or medical nature, the new law will maximise his autonomy to make decisions and ensure his wishes are fully respected.
Children First To ensure the safeguarding of children: •
Children First National Guidance for the Protection and Welfare of Children 2017 was launched and is available on www.childrenfirst.ie
A mandatory eLearning training programme was developed on www.hseland.ie.
83,000 staff, including those of funded and contracted agencies, have completed training.
The Children First compliance checklist for funded and contracted agencies has been rolled out to all CHOs and Hospital Groups.
The development of local Child Safeguarding Statements was progressed across CHOs and Hospital Groups.
National Independent
Review Panel
The National Independent Review Panel was set up in 2017 to provide the HSE with a means to independently review cases where there appears to have been serious failings across the HSE and HSE funded services, for people with a disability.
Its remit is to review the circumstances surrounding such cases, and present reports on its findings and recommendations.
Following appointment of an independent Chair in late 2016, five panel members, responsible for investigating a range of serious incidents, were appointed during 2017.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Excellence in Delivering our Health Service
Excellence in Delivering our Health Service
The annual Health Service Excellence Awards encourage and inspire people to develop better health services.
It is a platform to recognise innovation and best practice, celebrate success and promote learning for the benefit of others.
Over 300 projects from all over the country were entered into the 2017 Health Service Excellence Awards, with the award ceremony held at Farmleigh in Dublin’s Phoenix Park.
These projects highlight the commitment and dedication of our staff who are working every day to deliver better services with easier access and higher quality care for patients.
Eleven innovative projects made it through to the final shortlist after a rigorous selection process.
Health Service Excellence Awards 2017
Winners are being invited to present and share their learning nationwide in 2018 at Share the Learning Events being organised at CHO/Hospital Group level.
The projects of the finalists Award
Winner Overall
Innovative support co-ordination for older persons – National Social Care/CHO 9, Dublin North City and County and ALONE
Popular Choice; Team Project
Serum Eye Drop Programme – Galway Blood and Tissue Establishment University Hospital Galway
HR Special
Bronntanas Project – CHO 2 Mayo/Tusla/Mayo County Council
Improving Our Children’s Health
Influenza Vaccination Campaign – Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street), Dublin
Supporting a Healthy Community
Frail Intervention Therapy Team – Beaumont Hospital, Dublin
Improving Patient Experience
Promoting Food First model and managing hospital clinical nutrition products – St. Mary’s Hospital Phoenix Park, Dublin
Best Integration
Acute Diabetic Foot Pathway: a multi-disciplinary approach – St.
Vincent’s University Hospital, Dublin
Improving Efficiency and Value in
Health Care Advancing the role of the pharmacy technician and delivering better value for money on hospital drug spend – Connolly Hospital, Blanchardstown, Dublin
Excellence in Quality Care
Nurse led PICC line insertion service for haematology and oncology patients – University Hospital Waterford
Innovation in Service Delivery
Nurse led asymptomatic screening clinic – Gay Men’s Health Service, Baggot Street Hospital, Dublin
Championing Diversity, Equality and Inclusion
Siobhan O’Dea – Gay Men’s Health Service, Baggot Street Hospital, Dublin
Excellence in Patient Flow Management
Trauma Assessment Clinic – Midland Regional Hospital Tullamore
While we have focused on the Overall Award, Popular Choice Award and the HR Special Award on the next few pages, details of some of the other innovative projects can be seen throughout other sections of this Annual Report.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Excellence in Delivering our Health Service
Overall Award
Innovative support co-ordination for older persons
This joint project between the HSE and ALONE, aims to keep older people living well at home for as long as possible.
By co-ordinating and organising services for older people who might need some extra support to continue living at home or some practical help to return home from hospital, the two agencies to-date supported 489 older people in Dublin North City and County.
Trained volunteers provide: • A befriending and event service • Benefit and entitlements activation • Access to primary care services • Applications and oversight of adaption grants • End of life planning • Budgeting.
The aim of the project is to: • Reduce hospital admission and support older people being discharged to return home.
• Avoid nursing home admissions, for older people with lower support needs.
• Identify factors preventing an older person from living well at home and identify the practical, social resources and supports to address these factors.
• Link in with community and primary care supports.
• Co-ordinate multiple supports across state agencies and local community and private services.
• Apply for grants and aids for housing adaptions, and help with practical home modifications.
• Combat loneliness and isolation through befriending and advocacy services.
The programme creates a cost effective, scalable and transferable model by working with all services in the area to ensure older people get the support they need.
The roll-out of assistive technology to produce needs-based outputs available in real time is also being trialled.
A management information system has been developed to enhance the measuring and reporting of data.
Popular Choice Award
Serum eye drop programme – the Galway Blood and Tissue Establishment at University Hospital Galway
Prior to 2011, all patients prescribed autologous serum eye drops (ASEs) in Ireland had their serum derived from a unit of autologous (donated from the patient themselves) blood shipped to Speke, Liverpool for processing.
The product was then shipped back to Ireland and issued to the patient by the Irish Blood Transfusion Service.
The team carried out extensive research into the manufacture of the product in various sites worldwide and have dedicated years of service to obtaining the Good Manufacturing Practice (GMF) licence to produce autologous and allogenic (patient not suitable for donation so blood is obtained from the National Blood Centre) serum eye drops.
University Hospital Galway is now the only hospital in Ireland licenced to produce serum eye drops (SEs).
As there is no other site in Ireland manufacturing this product, all aspects of the procedure from patient assessment to production have been devised entirely by Galway Blood and Tissue Establishment.
SEs are a serum-derived product used to treat a range of ocular surface disorders.
2017 has been the busiest year for SEs to date and this has to be attributed to the ASE team for delivering such an efficient programme.
There are many patients throughout the country whose lives have been drastically improved thanks to this treatment.
HR Special Award
Bronntanas – Support to parents experiencing difficulties at Christmas The Bronntanas Project which is managed by Tusla staff in Co.
Mayo, in collaboration with staff in the HSE and Mayo County Council supports parents in Mayo who are experiencing difficulties at Christmas by providing a gift for them to give to their children on Christmas morning.
Volunteers from around the county, recruited through a media campaign, along with volunteers from the HSE, TUSLA and Mayo County Council purchase a small Christmas gift for a specific child whose parents are unable to do so.
The families are identified by community services or by their contact with the scheme co-ordinator.
Their requests are coded and volunteers are given brief details of what gift to purchase and a central point to drop it off.
Vouchers can also be given to parents to help towards the cost of a more expensive item.
The scheme co-ordinator manages the distribution of the gifts.
The parents who use the scheme find the professional way in which the gifts are organised to be supportive and nonjudgemental.
The scheme, which came to fruition after a conversation between staff on a coffee break 15 years ago, has grown from strength to strength.
Every year there is more demand for gifts.
In 2015 they provided over 250 gifts for children in Mayo, in 2016 it rose to 350 and over 500 presents were given out in 2017, bringing a little Christmas magic to many homes in need.
Health Service Excellence Awards 2017
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Health and Wellbeing
As part of the Healthy Ireland Operation Transformation
Programme, the HSE organised a Love Life – Love Walking staff event in February to increase awareness of the importance of incorporating physical activity into their working day.
Staff across our 2,594 work sites nationally walked to work or around their workplace as part of the initiative and shared their experience on social media.
Improving the health and wellbeing of the population is a cornerstone of the health reform programme.
Implementation of Healthy Ireland: A Framework for Improved Health and Wellbeing 2013-2025 is central to providing opportunities for everyone to enjoy physical and mental health and wellbeing to their full potential.
Promotion of health and wellbeing is delivered through national services including the screening service, environmental health, health promotion and improvement and public health.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Implementing Healthy Ireland Framework •
Structures are being put in place to enable implementation of Healthy Ireland at CHO level.
Implementation plans for six CHOs have been drafted with preparatory work underway to progress remaining CHO plans.
A Healthy Ireland fund was established by the DoH under a national initiative to improve health and wellbeing.
This new fund, which was allocated ‘kick start’ funding of €5m in 2017, aims to support partnership working to assist implementation of key national policies and plans under Healthy Ireland dealing with initiatives such as physical activity, obesity prevention and creating a tobacco-free society.
Healthy and Positive Ageing for All Research Strategy 2015-2019 was published to support and promote research that aims to improve people’s lives as they age.
The Healthy Ireland workplace framework was developed in partnership with the DoH.
Tobacco free Ireland: -
Findings from the Healthy Ireland Survey 2017 indicated that 47% of all who have smoked in the past 12 months have made an attempt to quit.
The new TV advert and campaign, I will Survive, was launched in April.
The campaign focused on the fact that in Ireland there are now more quitters than smokers.
This pro quitting message aims to lessen the fear that surrounds quitting and showcases a community of ex-smokers that people will be more likely to engage with.
The campaign won four awards, including two in the prestigious international category.
The New York State Department of Health, Bureau of Tobacco Control are airing this award winning TV advert from January 2018 across the State of New York.
Health and Wellbeing
An integrated model of care for the prevention and management of chronic disease was developed, together with the blueprint for requirements for the GP contract for the development of an integrated care pathway.
The national SMS framework and implementation plan for chronic conditions, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, diabetes and cardiovascular disease, Living Well with a Chronic Condition: Framework for SelfManagement Support, was developed.
This is being implemented through the self-management support co-ordinators who are being appointed in each CHO.
A clinical lead for obesity was appointed to progress implementation of A Healthy Weight for Ireland: Obesity Policy and Action Plan 2016-2025.
As part of the implementation of the National Sexual Health Strategy 2015-2020, the human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccine was extended to high risk groups including men aged between 16 and 26 years who have sex with men.
Work commenced on developing a revised model to support the implementation of the WHO/UNICEF Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding which is the basis of the Baby Friendly Health Initiative in Ireland.
Work continued to support and promote the uptake of BreastCheck, CervicalCheck, BowelScreen and Diabetic RetinaScreen amongst relevant populations in collaboration with the National Screening Service.
Ireland’s National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance 2017-2020 was published.
A HCAI/ AMR response team was established to work with all CHOs and Hospital Groups to progress AMR stewardship programmes and infection control procedures.
A national clinical lead was appointed to streamline and integrate HCAI/AMR related activity across the HSE.
The www.hse.ie/hcai website was also developed including information resource packs, training programmes and links to international sites.
As a public health response to the CPE/CRE (carbapenemase producing enterobacteriaceae/ carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae) superbug, a national public health emergency team was convened by Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD, to provide advice, guidance, support and direction on the surveillance and management of CPE at national level and in line with Ireland’s National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance 2017-2020.
The Environmental Health Service Review 2016 was published, providing an insight for both internal and external stakeholders on the breadth of the role of this service, setting out the broad range of activities undertaken.
While compliance with the Public Health (Tobacco) Act 2002 was high, there were ten prosecution cases in 2017 which resulted in convictions for tobacco related offences.
33,162 official food control surveillance inspections of food businesses were carried out.
Of those planned, and planned surveillance inspections, 20.7% had either an unsatisfactory, unsatisfactory significant, or unsatisfactory serious outcome.
There were 2,818 food related complaints received – 501 food complaints and 2,317 food business complaints.
Year three of the Public Health Sunbeds Inspection Programme was completed with 32 establishments having a test purchase inspection during the year.
To ensure compliance with Fluoridation of Water Supplies Regulations 2007 and the statutory range of concentration of fluoride in public drinking water supplies, 2,460 drinking samples were taken.
The Dementia: Understand Together initiative, led by the HSE in partnership with the Alzheimer Society of Ireland and Genio, launched a new TV, radio and online advertising campaign.
The launch of the campaign coincided with the official unveiling of the new website www.understandtogether.ie for people who want to find out more about dementia.
A new five-year public health awareness campaign START was launched in collaboration with safefood to set families on the path to a healthier future.
The campaign, which is underpinned by A Healthy Weight for Ireland: Obesity Policy and Action Plan 2016-2025, was developed with the input of parents, health professionals and community leaders.
It acknowledges that the solutions to tackling overweight and obesity are multiple and that every sector has a role to play in this major health issue.
Pictured at the launch: Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD, and Minister of State for Health Promotion and the National Drugs Strategy, Catherine Byrne TD, with Jack and Hannah Galvin.
The Making Every Contact Count (MECC) programme aims to capitalise on the opportunities that occur every day for every health professional to support patients through a brief intervention to make a lifestyle change and reduce the risk of chronic disease.
The MECC framework which was launched during the year includes a model for health behaviour change and a three-year implementation plan.
Pictured at the launch: Dr Stephanie O’Keeffe, National Director, Health and Wellbeing, Dr Orlaith O’Reilly, National Clinical Advisor and Programme Lead and Dr Áine Carroll, National Director, Clinical Programmes.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare
Community healthcare includes the broad range of services that are provided outside of the acute hospital system.
This includes health and wellbeing, primary care and mental health services, and services for people with disabilities and older people.
Primary Care
Working towards enabling a decisive shift towards stronger and more integrated primary care services, reducing the need for admission to hospital, while ensuring improvements to the quality, safety, access and responsiveness of these services.
Services include primary care teams (PCTs), community healthcare network services, general practice, social inclusion, palliative care services and schemes reimbursement.
Mental Health
Supporting people in achieving optimal mental health and allowing participation in life to the fullest extent possible.
Successfully treating within a primary care setting, with less than 10% being referred to specialist community based mental health services.
Specialist mental health services include acute inpatient services, day hospitals, outpatient clinics, community-based mental health teams (CAMHs, general adult and psychiatry of later life), mental health of intellectual disability, community residential and continuing care residential services.
People with Disabilities
Transforming lives and enabling people with disabilities to achieve their full potential, as independently as possible, living ordinary lives in ordinary places.
Services are provided to those with physical, sensory, intellectual disability and autism in day, respite and residential settings.
Services include personal assistant, home support and other community supports.
Older People
Empowering and maximising the potential of older people, their families and local communities so that people can live independently in their own homes and communities as far as possible.
Improving the quality of life for those with more complex health and social care needs by shifting the delivery of care away from acute hospitals towards community-based, planned and co-ordinated care.
Services include home supports, short-stay and long-stay residential care, transitional care and day care.
These services are delivered through the HSE and its funded agencies to people in local communities, as close as possible to their homes through nine Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs).
A Chief Officer leads a local management team in each CHO, focusing on all of the specialist services in their area.
This arrangement aims to make it easier for people to access local services, improve management and accountability and allow stronger local decision-making.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare
Nine Community Healthcare Organisations…
Serving the population of over 4.7 million people – subdivided into 96 networks so that care and services are delivered on a population basis
Donegal
Monaghan
Sligo
Mayo
Leitrim
Cavan
Louth
Roscommon
Longford
Meath
Westmeath
Galway
Offaly
DNW
DNC
DW
DSC
DSE DL
Kildare
Clare
Tipperary
Kerry
Wexford
Laois
Limerick
Kilkenny
Waterford
CHO 1: Cavan, Donegal, Leitrim, Monaghan, Sligo
CHO 2: West: Galway, Mayo, Roscommon
CHO 3: Mid-West: Clare, Limerick, North Tipperary
CHO 4: Cork and Kerry
CHO 5: South-East: Carlow, Kilkenny, South Tipperary, Waterford, Wexford
CHO 6: Dublin South East, Dun Laoghaire, Wicklow
CHO 7: Dublin South, Kildare, West Wicklow
CHO 8: Midlands, Louth, Meath
CHO 9: Dublin North City and County
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare
Progressing our Priorities…
Improving the quality, safety, access and responsiveness of services to support a decisive shift to primary care Referrals to community intervention teams (CITs) increased by 38% in 2017 with 38,207 referrals being managed.
An audit of services has commenced and quality improvements have been implemented.
The primary care ultrasound initiative which provides direct access for GPs to ultrasound was further strengthened, reducing the need for referrals to outpatient departments.
20,652 ultrasounds were provided along the west coast from Donegal to Cork.
Thirteen primary care centres completed construction, of which ten became operational.
The first national Primary Care Eye Services Review Group Report was published which estimates that 60% of existing outpatient activity could be moved to the community, allowing hospital services to focus on patients who require more specialist diagnostics or treatments.
Implementation of recommendations has commenced including the school vision screening service.
Primary Care
Building a Better GP and Primary Care Service
It supports the need to shift to a patientcentred primary care service that meets the needs of our growing and changing population, reducing the reliance on hospital care.
With the support of €4m funding, implementation of service improvement initiatives enabled the reduction of waiting times for speech and language therapy services across CHOs.
81 of the 83 speech and language therapy posts were filled and an additional 45,985 appointments were provided.
Hepatitis C •
A new national clinical guideline for hepatitis C screening was published.
This aims to reduce the overall health and economic impact of hepatitis C infection.
A clinical lead for the national hepatitis C treatment programme was appointed.
Improved commercial terms regarding the cost of drugs used in treating hepatitis C infection resulted in 48% more patients receiving treatment.
Two pilot treatment programmes commenced in the HSE addiction service setting.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Improving health outcomes for the most vulnerable in society
Addiction services •
At year end 9,804 patients were in receipt of opioid substitution treatment outside of prisons.
This included 4,242 patients treated by 362 GPs in the community with 700 pharmacies catering for 6,891 patients.
Individual rehabilitation pathways were created to meet the needs of those affected by drug misuse in line with the National Drugs Rehabilitation Framework.
Of the people who commenced treatment 63% of those aged over 18 had an assigned key worker and 74% had a written care plan, while 84% of those aged under 18 years had an assigned key worker and 85% had a written care plan.
Community Healthcare
Assistant National Director
Primary Care Reimbursement and Eligibility
National Director Primary Care
Medical card eligibility has been extended to support the care of children under 16 years who are affected by a health condition or disability and where a domiciliary care allowance is payable.
More than 9,500 additional children received medical card eligibility from 1st June.
Screening and brief intervention training for alcohol and substance misuse (SAOR) training was delivered to 1,239 staff, 59% over what was planned.
This was enabled through the SAOR Train the Trainer Programme.
The procurement process to develop a medically supervised injecting centre in Dublin City Centre was progressed.
The Misuse of Drugs (Supervised Injecting Facilities) Bill 2017 was published in February which enables the issuing of a licence to operate Ireland’s first supervised injecting facility.
Training in the administration and provision of naloxone was provided to 86 staff, homeless services and voluntary providers and train the trainer for facilitator trainers for the programme was provided to 14 people.
1,039 naloxone products were provided to services, a two-fold increase on 2016.
In line with Rebuilding Ireland, Action Plan for Housing and Homelessness, our focus is to improve health outcomes for those experiencing or at risk of homelessness, particularly those with addiction and mental health needs.
With the support of additional funding a number of areas were progressed including: -
Expansion of access to a key worker, case management, GP and nursing services through the homeless action teams in each CHO.
Development of targets, outcomes and quality standards with section 39 service providers to support enhanced monitoring and evaluation of existing service arrangements.
Establishment of an oversight committee to finalise the discharge protocol for homeless persons in acute hospitals and mental health facilities in line with the National Hospital Discharge Protocol for Homelessness (Guidance Framework).
Pilot activities commenced in CHOs 2, 5, 6, 7 and 9, and staff were recruited in St. James’s Hospital and the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital to progress hospital discharges.
In-reach specialty primary care and mental health services were provided to homeless accommodation.
Traveller, refugee, asylum seeker and Roma communities •
The National Traveller and Roma Inclusion Strategy 2017-2021 was launched.
This is a cross-departmental initiative to improve the lives of Traveller and Roma communities in Ireland.
In partnership with Sonas Domestic Violence Charity, a domestic, sexual and gender-based violence train the trainer programme was developed and delivered.
A mobile health screening unit, operated by Safetynet, was rolled out as an innovative means of providing health screening and basic primary care to refugees, as well as to other marginalised groups.
Training on intercultural awareness and practice was undertaken by staff working with marginalised groups across all CHOs.
Homeless services •
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare
The Green Ribbon campaign which is funded by the HSE has come to symbolise mental health awareness.
The campaign is led by
See Change ambassadors and the 2017 campaign saw 500,000 green ribbons distributed across the country to spark a national conversation about mental health and challenging the stigma of mental health problems.
Reducing stigma is an important part of our national strategy Connecting for Life
Ireland’s National Strategy to Reduce Suicide 2015-2020.
Consultant Psychiatrist and Clinical Programme Group Lead.
Improving palliative care services for patients and families facing life-limiting illnesses Palliative care focuses on helping people of all ages to live well with an illness that is life-limiting and to achieve the best quality of life as their illness progresses.
A 15-bed specialist inpatient unit opened in University Hospital Kerry.
The new Palliative Care Services Three Year Development Framework (2017-2019), informing the development of adult palliative care services, was launched.
Its aim is to ensure a seamless care pathway across inpatient, home care, nursing home, acute hospital and day care services.
Following an evaluation of the Children’s Palliative Care Programme in 2016, work is progressing to recruit a national co-ordinator for children’s palliative care and also a children’s clinical nurse co-ordinator for children with life-limiting conditions for Kerry.
National Clinical Effectiveness Committee (NCEC) guidelines were developed on the management of cancer pain and the management of constipation in palliative care patients.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Eleven projects were completed under the design and dignity grant scheme.
These projects improve the hospital environment for palliative care patients, their families and staff.
Delivering primary care schemes through the primary care reimbursement service •
The new national medical card online application service went live.
This new streamlined service provides great benefits for people in terms of turnaround times, convenience and security.
For those aged over 70 years, prescription charges were reduced to €2 per item and the monthly cap was reduced to €20.
As part of the implementation of policy and value for money projects for community demand-led schemes a number of initiatives were progressed, including development of a nutrition support online tool kit which is available on www.hse.ie.
Community Healthcare
Mental Health
Promoting positive mental health •
Connecting for Life plans were developed for six CHOs and work is well advanced in developing plans for the remaining CHOs.
More on this can be seen within the CHO sections of this Annual Report.
A standardised bereavement training programme was developed for those working with people bereaved by suicide.
It will be rolled out in 2018.
As part of the implementation of the national training plan for suicide reduction, a train the trainers guide was developed for the suicide prevention awareness training programme.
12,308 participants completed suicide prevention training across the CHOs.
Implementation of Clinical Programmes
• A draft model of care for eating disorders was completed and a four year implementation plan was developed to allow for phased recruitment and training of dedicated eating disorder teams.
The National Youth Mental Health Taskforce Report 2017 was published.
Its recommendations, when implemented, will enhance co-ordination and standardisation of training nationally and support additional prevention and early intervention initiatives for children and young people.
Promoting simple and powerful day-to-day steps to protect our own mental health and support the people we care about is the focus of the #littlethings campaign.
A national youth co-ordinator was funded in addition to one for each CHO.
The campaign now has 70,000 followers on Facebook and 10,000 followers on twitter.
By the end of 2017 www.yourmentalhealth.ie had over 800,000 visitors and over 2.5 million page views.
• A national review of the self-harm national clinical programme was published.
• Following a training needs assessment for the clinical programme for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children and adults, a training package is being designed.
• A clinical lead has been appointed to the clinical programme for dual diagnosis and a national working group established to develop a model of care.
• Recruitment of individual placement support workers for the early intervention in psychosis clinical programme was advanced.
Improving access to mental health services and improving service user flow •
Enhancement of primary care based services: -
Dublin Jigsaw site was established with Cork and Limerick sites at advanced stages of development.
A review of the Jigsaw service is due to be completed and published in early 2018.
20 psychologists and 120 assistant psychologist posts have been accepted and are being contracted which will increase access to counselling services in primary care for those aged under 18 years.
One new psychiatry of later life team was put in place, increasing the total to 30 teams nationally.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare
Improvements within child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHs):
Disability Services
A review group was established to evaluate and assess the CAMHs standard operating procedure.
The group includes service users and family members.
Time to move on from congregated settings – supporting the move from institutional to community settings
Three new CAMHs teams were put in place, increasing the total to 69 teams nationally.
Specialist Perinatal Mental Health Services, Model of Care for Ireland was launched.
It supports the mental health actions being implemented by the National Women and Infants’ Health Programme.
Traveller co-ordinator posts for each CHO were advertised and a steering group established to develop a joint stepped model of care across mental health and primary care for Travellers with mental health needs.
Over 2,000 development posts have been approved in the period from 2013 to 2017 with over 300 WTE posts approved across a range of services/disciplines under the Programme for Government funding 2017.
Engaging with service users, family members and carers •
The HSE Best Practice Guidance for Mental Health Services was launched and a train the trainer programme commenced to support its roll-out across the country.
Area leads for mental health engagement were appointed to each CHO and will be responsible for setting up local and area forums to represent the views of service users and their families.
20 peer support workers were appointed to progress implementation of Advancing Recovery in Ireland across all CHOs, an initiative which brings recovery principles into the heart of how we work collaboratively.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 •
Community Healthcare
a service user who shared her story
Transforming lives…
Transforming Lives Progress Report 2016 was published and highlights examples of where people with a disability are supported to live more fulfilling and inclusive lives in their communities.
Personal stories show us the real impact that reform is having on the lives of people with disabilities
New Directions – improving day services to enable people to have choice and options about how they live their lives and how they spend their time •
Implementation groups were established in each CHO to progress delivery on New Directions.
Additional day services and rehabilitation training was provided, benefiting 901 young school leavers.
A self-assessment tool and quality improvement plans were developed to address any service gaps, and this was piloted in 18 sites.
Services for children and young people – ensuring one clear pathway to services •
www.informingfamilies.ie developed by parents and professionals, was launched and has become a powerful support tool for both staff who must inform families of their child’s disability, and parents dealing with life-altering news and coming to terms with their child’s extra needs.
The first national conference for progressing disability services for children and young people was held in Limerick.
It brought together more than 300 parents and staff to share learning and good practice in the provision of disability services for children and young people and was an opportunity to explore innovative ideas and celebrate achievements to date.
Over 500 delegates also joined the conference via Webinar.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Classic furniture and various props in the room help residents tap more easily into memories from their past.
It is a space to relax, listen to music, have morning/ afternoon tea and reminisce in.
This room provides a relaxing place for relatives to talk to and be with their loved one.
The room enables more personal relationships to be created between staff and residents and is an interactive space.
The objects in the room stimulate memories enabling staff to get to know the residents in a more meaningful way.
Service improvement teams – building capability and analysis •
Service improvement teams are ensuring that resources are used to best effect within services and that sustainable models of care are implemented.
Work continued on linking activity and outputs, costs, quality and outcomes.
The work already commenced in 2016 on a comparative analysis of 45 organisations (both section 38 and section 39) continued.
Older Persons’ Services
Providing the appropriate supports following an acute hospital episode focusing on delayed discharges •
HIQA compliance •
To further embed standards for effective and person-centered care in CHOs, including the strengthening of governance, Quality and Safety Committees were established and quality and safety staff were appointed.
There were 27,317 disability services compliance outcomes inspected at end 2017 (HSE provided and HSE funded).
Sustained improvements in relation to compliance continued from 34% in 2014 to 80% in 2017.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
The Winter Initiative Programme continued to provide enhanced services through additional transitional care beds and additional home care packages.
This specific provision together with mainstream home care, residential care and transitional care supported discharges from our acute hospitals and assisted others to remain in their own homes.
Further detail on this can be seen on page 24.
Enhancing home care services •
Work continued to improve home care services received by older people.
This included arranging for approved levels of home care to be delivered by a single provider selected by the person themselves from a pre-approved list.
Preparatory work commenced towards moving to a single funding system for home care services.
This system will provide a more streamlined service, simpler and easier for people to use with an enhanced level of care, improving the Community Healthcare availability, accessibility and experience of services by older people, their families and carers.
As part of the Home Support Scheme, with agreement of the DoH, funding for the home help service and the home care package scheme are being brought together from 2018 so that home support for older people will operate as a single funded service.
A pilot commenced in CHO 3 to test that the approach being pursued is one which will meet the needs of service users.
Improving services and supports for people with dementia •
Implementation of the Irish National Dementia Strategy progressed.
Plans were finalised with each CHO for new memory Technology Libraries to become operational in 2018
A new website www.understandtogether.ie was also developed in conjunction with the Alzheimer Society of Ireland.
The website provides information on dementia and services available around the country.
Supporting implementation of the Integrated Care Programme for Older People •
Work continued with the integrated care programme for older people to support the transfer of learning from pioneer sites established in 2016 to 12 demonstrator sites.
This included undertaking mapping exercises, population planning and processing performance data collection.
Service user engagement is underway in partnership with the Age Friendly Cities and Counties Programme (aligned with other HSE initiatives).
This will inform service improvement for local integrated care services.
A workshop on Cultivating Patient Leadership was attended by 120 delegates, raising awareness both of the need for Age Friendly Councils and the opportunities that are there to get involved in integrated care.
Supporting directors of nursing and leadership in community hospitals and residential settings to implement a best practice model.
Reviewing nursing management structures to strengthen governance arrangements in public residential care facilities.
Rolling out the Single Assessment Tool (SAT)
The specially designed software information system SAT facilitates the gathering of information for older people through one assessment process, on behalf of the older person who applies for support under the Home Care Package Scheme or the NHSS.
Work is being progressed on the roll-out of SAT across all CHOs to enable staff to better assess and plan older persons’ care.
An international pilot of the carer needs assessment tool was completed.
The carer needs assessment development working group undertook a literature review of available carer needs assessments.
The final family carer needs assessment form was assessed in a pre-piloting scoping exercise both in Ireland and in Belgium, to assess the acceptability of the assessment for carers.
The assessment form is now available for use internationally in any country using interRAI assessment systems.
In Ireland it is planned to pilot the carer needs assessment in a CHO, across all care groups to test its suitability for implementation.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare Organisations
Delivery of community healthcare services through the nine CHOs is part of a significant reform programme which aims to increase access, quality and integration of care to people in local communities.
Many service improvements took place within our CHOs during the year and a flavour of these is included over the following pages.
Community Healthcare Organisations
Cavan, Donegal, Leitrim, Monaghan, Sligo Community Healthcare Organisation 1 Population: 391,281
In the spirit of promoting the benefits of sport for people with disabilities, a Come and Try – Sports Ability Day was organised in partnership with Sligo Sports and Recreation, the Irish Wheelchair Association and Leitrim Sports.
The event was attended by approximately 30 participants including children and adults who enjoyed exploring how to make their sport or club more accessible.
Pictured: Callum Woods and Leah Duggan participating at the Come and Try – Sports Ability Day.
• Media briefings on suicide and murder suicide were held in Donegal and Cavan.
The Community Inclusion Hub in Letterkenny was officially opened, part of the Donegal community inclusion training services which has transitioned from a community workshop model to a person-centred approach to day service provision for people with disabilities.
It serves as a meeting point for services users, allowing them to participate in and contribute to community life and to access local services and facilities.
Following extensive refurbishment, the Virginia Community Health Centre, Cavan and St. Mary’s Residential Care Centre, Monaghan were officially opened in September.
A €900,000 upgrade of x-ray equipment was provided in four Donegal community hospitals – Donegal Town, Killybegs, Dungloe and Carndonagh.
Facilities will be upgraded with modern digital x-ray equipment and will be linked with Letterkenny and Sligo University Hospitals.
Eighteen managers completed an eight-day Leadership Development programme over a period of eight months.
This programme is a vehicle for managers to build a better health service for the communities they serve and the colleagues they work with.
A showcase of 14 self-management support (SMS) programmes, operating in Co.
Donegal for people with long-term health conditions, was held in Letterkenny.
The event was hosted by the HSE SMS service in Co Donegal to: -
Ensure more service users are connected with appropriate and timely supports
Foster links between the community and voluntary sectors and the HSE
Provide information about access and referral pathways to these programmes
Promote integration across all sectors involved in caring for people with long-term health conditions.
Connecting for Life Suicide Prevention Action Plans 2017-2020 were launched for -
Sligo and Leitrim
Cavan and Monaghan.
Three new suicide prevention resources were launched as part of Donegal’s Connecting for Life, Donegal Action Plan 2015-2020.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare Organisations
West: Galway, Mayo, Roscommon Community Healthcare Organisation
Turning of the sod for a 14-bed inpatient hospice facility in Castlebar, Co Mayo, by former US Vice President Joe Biden, with board members and staff of Mayo Roscommon Hospice.
A staff flu vaccine campaign, Get a Vaccine, Give a Vaccine, was launched in partnership with UNICEF.
For every flu vaccine given to staff, ten polio vaccines were donated to UNICEF.
As part of Ireland’s Operation Transformation Programme, the Love Life, Love Walking Day was held on 14th February.
Approximately 300 staff participated in lunchtime walking events.
The Tobacco Free Campus initiative progressed across all residential centres for mental health and older persons’ services.
Connecting for Life Galway, Mayo and Roscommon Suicide Prevention Action Plan 2017-2020 was launched in December. •
As part of Moving on from Congregated Settings, two community houses were opened to facilitate residents moving from Áras Attracta, Co Mayo.
Mountbellew Primary Care Centre, Co. Galway was officially opened in October.
The centre boasts an x-ray department among other facilities and serves a population of approximately 26,800 people.
The Bronntanas Project won the National HR Award in the 2017 Health Service Excellence Awards.
Further details of this can be seen on page 29 of this Annual Report.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare Organisations
Mid-West: Clare, Limerick, North Tipperary Community Healthcare Organisation
Former Minister of State for Mental Health and Older People at the official opening of the Brian Boru Suite, Raheen Community Nursing Unit.
A joint Flu Campaign was launched in conjunction with UL Hospitals Group, which increased the uptake of the vaccine among healthcare workers.
Healthy Limerick was launched.
Limerick City and County Council has become a member of the national Healthy City and Counties Network, an initiative under Healthy Ireland, working in partnership with local stakeholders to improve health and wellbeing for all.
The Happy Heart Healthy Eating Award was won by the catering manager, St. Camillus Hospital in Limerick.
This award encourages workplaces to play a key part in offering healthier food choices.
In line with New Directions, our national policy to provide personal support services for adults with disabilities, all school leavers and those leaving rehabilitation training were accommodated.
Brian Boru Suite, Raheen Community Nursing Unit was officially opened.
The €1.6m upgrade of residential facilities is designed to enhance the quality of care and accommodation for older people and includes 25 beds, 15 of them long-term and ten short-stay beds.
Sycamore Suite, Ennistymon Community Nursing Unit was officially opened.
The suite was designed in consultation with residents at a cost of €1.7m.
The new build provides a modern purpose built environment that is bright, spacious, homely and welcoming.
Community intervention teams provided services for over 5,000 referrals of which over 3,000 referrals resulted in hospital avoidance.
Six additional speech and language therapy posts were provided to enable the reduction of waiting times for speech and language therapy services.
A pilot home care project commenced which facilitates greater choice for people accessing home care.
Connecting for Life Mid West Suicide Prevention Action Plan 2017-2020 was launched.
As part of Time to Move on from Congregated Settings – A Strategy for Community Inclusion, seven people moved from St. Vincent’s Centre in Lisnagry, Co Limerick to live in the community.
A new Safeguarding Committee for Vulnerable Adults was established.
As part of the Values in Action project, Values in Action Champions brought Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann indoors to St. Joseph’s Hospital, Ennis by hosting a lunchtime concert for patients and their families.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare Organisations
Cork and Kerry Community Healthcare Organisation
Finbarr in his new home in Youghal with Yvonne, clinical nurse manager and Kim, registered nurse, intellectual disabilities.
Extensive consultation took place on the development of a Healthy Ireland Implementation Plan for Cork and Kerry.
Staff participated in many health and wellbeing initiatives including clocking up millions of steps as part of the steps challenge and 400 staff attended a health and wellbeing day in Farran Woods.
A monthly health and wellbeing newsletter is circulated and calorie posting was introduced in many sites.
Building work was completed on a new primary care centre at St. Mary’s Campus, Gurranabraher, the largest primary care centre in the country.
A 15-bed specialist palliative inpatient unit opened in Tralee following collaboration between the HSE and the Kerry Hospice Foundation.
The community work department launched its fifth series of the booklet Lighting the Way East Cork, a valuable resource for families and friends of people bereaved by suicide.
Deer Lodge, a €13m mental health recovery unit, opened in Killarney.
It is a modern and accessible 40-bed facility and care is provided with the aim of ensuring that residents have maximum involvement in their own recovery process and can move towards more independent living.
Connecting for Life Kerry Suicide Prevention Action Plan 2017-2020 was launched.
Connecting for Life Cork Suicide and Self-Harm Prevention Action Plan 2017-2020 was launched.
As part of Time to Move on from Congregated Settings, eight people from Chluain Fhionnan in Killarney and 16 people from St.
Raphael’s in Youghal moved into houses in their respective communities.
Fourteen transitional care beds opened in Clonakilty to allow for patients to be cared for during the transition period post their discharge from Cork University Hospital, helping to assist patient flow from the hospital.
The inaugural Cork and Kerry community hospitals nursing conference was held in Killarney and attended by 120 nurses, as well as representatives from University College Cork, University of Limerick and Institute of Technology, Tralee.
A comprehensive directory of services for older people across Cork City and County was developed.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare Organisations
South-East: Carlow, Kilkenny,
South Tipperary, Waterford, Wexford Community Healthcare Organisation
A disability awareness training resource pack, Let’s Able, Not Label, was launched for first year students in Tipperary Town.
Pictured: Anne, Tipperary Gold Star/HSE; Joanne, Disability Rights Activist; Carol, Disability Services Manager, HSE/South Tipperary Primary Care Services and Fiona, Tipperary County Council.
A patient information leaflet, for use by Primary Care Teams in the Waterford area, was launched.
It outlines treatment options, transgender specific assessment and care, a summary of services for children and adolescents and other resources.
It was issued to approximately 300 GPs.
The Recovery College South East, Kilkenny was formally launched.
The concept of a Recovery College is to empower people with mental health difficulties and provide connection, hope, identity, meaning and empowerment through recovery focused education.
Participants can enrol in workshops to help them manage their own personal recovery journey from mental health and addiction challenges using a co-developed and co-delivered educational framework.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
An open door policy is in place, giving all an opportunity to access mental health wellness and recovery education.
Connecting for Life Action Plans 2017-2020 were launched for: -
South Tipperary
Waterford
Carlow
Full construction began in October of a new 100-bed residential care centre at St. Patrick’s Hospital in Waterford.
Carlow Age Friendly Strategy 2017-2022 was launched.
It was developed collaboratively and in consultation with older people in Carlow and is aimed at improving the health and quality of life of older people in the county.
The community speech and language therapy service in South Tipperary was highly commended at the National Adult Literacy Agency Plain English Awards for its speech and language therapy assessment information leaflet for parents/carers.
Community Healthcare Organisations
Dublin South East, Dun Laoghaire, Wicklow Community Healthcare Organisation 6 Population: 393,239
To mark national breastfeeding week, the public health nursing department held two public events to celebrate having the highest breastfeeding rates in Ireland.
Pictured: Laura Campbell with baby James, and Rowena Duffy with baby Isabella at the breastfeeding celebration day at the Radisson Hotel Stillorgan.
A number of Healthy Ireland staff engagement and consultation sessions took place to inform development of the Healthy Ireland Implementation Plan.
The sixth edition of the nutrition reference pack (0-12 months) was published.
The pack was developed by the dietetics team to support staff who work with infants and their families to promote reliable and evidence based nutrition messages.
A six week X-Pert education programme for adults with type 2 diabetes was delivered by community dieticians to 250 clients.
Implementation of a service improvement programme by the physiotherapy service, Arklow resulted in the reduction of waiting times for initial assessment from 32 weeks to four weeks.
This resulted in reduced waiting times for provision of orthoses to clients with non-complex at-risk foot problems from 52 weeks to nine weeks, increasing patient satisfaction and improving outcomes for clients.
Connecting for Life Dublin South East, Dun Laoghaire and East Wicklow Reducing Suicide Together Action Plan 2015-2020 was launched.
The physiotherapy department, in conjunction with Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council led a six week Learn to Cycle programme for children with disabilities, aimed at teaching them how to cycle independently and safely.
The CHO became an Advancing Recovery Ireland site, bringing together service users, families and community supports to work on making our mental health services more recovery focused.
The European Kate Granger Award for Compassionate Care was won by one of the general managers, older persons’ services for pioneering work in dementia care.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare Organisations
Dublin South, Kildare, West Wicklow Community Healthcare Organisation 7 Population: 697,644
A New Directions learning event was held in St.
Michael’s House, where service providers demonstrated how services are being re-organised to provide enhanced day support programmes for adults with disabilities. Pictured: Luca Melocco Mulville,
Peter Carmody and Ailis Colgan.
Four staff Healthy Ireland engagement sessions were held to support development of the Healthy Ireland implementation plan.
Staff participated in many Healthy Ireland initiatives during the year such as Love Life, Love Walking day in February and the staff Step to Health Challenge.
A steering group was established to oversee the chronic disease management programme and teams for respiratory and diabetes commenced in Tallaght.
New primary care centres opened in Blessington, Wicklow and Celbridge, Co Kildare.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 •
Community Healthcare Organisations
Midlands, Louth, Meath
Community Healthcare Organisation
Six Healthy Ireland staff engagement sessions were attended by 345 staff.
These provided an opportunity for staff to get to know more about Healthy Ireland and to share ideas on how to improve the health and wellbeing of both staff and service users.
A self-management support co-ordinator for chronic conditions took up post.
Self-management support helps people to develop the knowledge, confidence and skills needed to make optimal decisions in managing their chronic condition(s), such as COPD, asthma, diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
There was an increase in the uptake of the flu vaccination among staff.
For every flu vaccine given to staff, ten polio vaccines were donated to UNICEF.
Through INvolve!, mental health service engagement and involvement, service users of mental health services in Louth/Meath area participated in a ten week programme with a focus on skill development including leadership and facilitation.
An event was held to showcase the success of the programme and the community and voluntary mental health supports in the area.
It was attended by services users, family members, carers/supporters and staff and highlighted the importance of increasing the involvement and engagement of people with lived experience in mental health related organisations.
Connecting for Life suicide action plan is at an advanced stage of development for Midlands, Louth and Meath.
The x-ray department at Clonbrusk primary care centre, Athlone won the Medray/IIRRT 2017 Department of the Year award.
It is the first radiology department to be located within a primary care centre where patients can avail of x-rays and scans locally without the need for attendance at hospital emergency departments.
As part of Time to Move on from Congregated Settings – A Strategy for Community Inclusion, 16 people were transferred from St John of God’s, Drumcar, Co Louth and two people moved from Muirosa to the community.
Refurbishment works were undertaken at Riada House which is a 29-bed unit in Tullamore, Co Offaly.
It is expected that refurbishments will be completed in February 2018.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Community Healthcare Organisations
Dublin North City and County
Community Healthcare Organisation
Can You Hear Me Now is a voice and support group set up by the speech and language therapy service for people living with Parkinson’s disease.
Approximately 12 people meet on two occasions each month to receive education and guidance on living well with Parkinson’s disease.
The initiative has also been extended to Ballymun Civic Centre.
There was an increase in the uptake of the flu vaccination by staff, resulting in the national target being exceeded.
Corduff primary care centre was officially opened.
This new modern centre hosts a range of services including paediatric occupational therapy, physiotherapy, dental, public health nursing, GP and CAMH services.
Balbriggan primary care centre also opened providing a full range of primary care and mental health services including CAMHs.
A diabetes patient structured education programme, a pulmonary rehabilitation programme and diabetes and respiratory integrated care programmes are being delivered in the community in conjunction with Connolly, Beaumont and the Mater Misericordiae University Hospitals.
Thirteen speech and language therapists were appointed supporting the reduction of waiting times for children under 18 years.
An area lead for mental health engagement was appointed, ensuring the views and experiences of service users and their supporters are at the heart of planning and delivery of mental health services.
A Jigsaw site was established in Dublin City centre.
Jigsaw is a network of projects, working with communities to better support young people’s mental health and wellbeing.
During the year, 573 young people were seen and 1,266 sessions completed. •
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Two suicide resource officers are now in post and a cross-sectoral Connecting for Life steering group was established.
Twelve people were transitioned from congregated settings to community living.
Physiotherapy services in Ballymun participated in the Balance Matters project in conjunction with health promotion services and Dublin City Sport and Wellbeing Partnership.
This facilitates targeted, sustainable exercise interventions among older adults who have fallen, are at risk of falling or have a fear of falling.
The single assessment tool was rolled out across the North Dublin area for older persons’ services.
The Innovative Support Co-ordination for Older Persons project won the overall award in this year’s Health Service Excellence Awards.
Further details on this can be seen on page 29 of this Annual Report.
The Food Project, St. Mary’s Hospital, Phoenix Park won the Improving Patient Experience Award at the Health Service Excellence Awards.
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care refers to the broad range of services, including pre-hospital emergency care, that is provided within the acute hospital system.
Pre-Hospital Emergency Care
Providing professional and compassionate clinical care and transport to patients, in partnership with the wider health service.
Acute Hospital Care
Providing safe and effective patient-centred care to the population, through seven Hospital Groups and forty-eight acute hospitals.
National Women and Infants’ Health Programme Leading the management, organisation and delivery of maternity, benign gynaecology and neonatal services.
Cancer Services
Leading the development and provision of cancer care from prevention, early diagnosis and treatment, to appropriate follow-up and support in both the acute hospital and community settings.
Acute hospital services are provided to patients by the 48 acute hospitals via seven Hospital Groups, each led by a Chief Executive Officer and their respective management teams.
This governance structure facilitates improved access to quality services supported by robust management and accountability arrangements at all levels of the service.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
Delivering Hospital Services through Hospital Groups
Our seven Hospital Groups provide the structure to deliver an integrated hospital network of acute care.
The National Ambulance Service (NAS) is the statutory provider for the State of pre-hospital emergency and intermediate care, working in conjunction with the Dublin Fire Brigade, the Irish Air Corps, the Irish Coast Guard and, in the border areas, with the Northern Ireland Ambulance Service.
European Restart a Heart Week took place in October to create awareness that everyone can and should become familiar with cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
If someone suffers a cardiac arrest, their chances of survival double if it happens in front of a bystander who immediately rings 112/999 and starts CPR before an ambulance’s arrival.
Throughout the week, hundreds of HSE staff around the country took part in CPR familiarisation sessions where they could listen to a simulated 112/999 call, follow the instructions of a paramedic and practise CPR, with the assistance of volunteers from the National Ambulance Service, resuscitation training officers and community first responders.
Improving operational performance and outcomes for patients •
To further improve response times and expand the intermediate care service (ICS), which supports Hospital Groups in inter-hospital transfers, additional staff were trained, including: -
87 paramedics completed their post-graduate training and were deployed to operational bases, while 95 student paramedics commenced their training programme.
52 new intermediate care operatives completed their training programme and were deployed.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Response times are steadily improving with 83% of ECHO calls (life-threatening cardiac or respiratory arrest) and 61% of DELTA calls (other life-threatening illness or injury) responded to within 18 minutes and 59 seconds.
Work continued, as part of the National Transport Medicine Programme to develop patient retrieval services in support of clinical networks and in line with national policy.
Recruitment campaigns are underway to progress the implementation of the Road Safety Authority Emergency Services Driving Standards and the development of an emergency management function.
Pre-Hospital Emergency Care
Sophie receiving her certificate from call taker Aoife at the National Emergency Operations Centre in Tallaght.
Seven year old Sophie Doyle received a certificate of bravery after ringing 999 to tell them that her mother, Janet, had gone into anaphylactic shock.
Speaking after the incident, Janet Doyle said she was amazed at the service, and how the ambulance and dispatch team worked together to get her safely to hospital, while also keeping Sophie calm.
Improving quality of care and patient safety through enhancing clinical competencies and governance arrangements
Providing a flexible, safe, responsive and effective service to meet planned alternative models of patient care and improving the health needs of the population •
The number of community first responder schemes has increased to 168 (from 145 in 2016) and three Community Engagement Officers have been appointed to focus on targeted areas.
Progression of the alternative care pathway, Hear and Treat, is on-going, through the appointment and training of an initial cohort of staff and development of the necessary infrastructure including a computer aided dispatch (CAD) system.
Community-based education and training programmes were progressed within the development of community first responder schemes and the work of the Out of Hospital Cardiac Arrest Steering Group.
The National Ambulance Service Review of Organisational Design was finalised as part of the process to commence implementation of the NAS Operating Model.
Roll-out of the electronic patient care record (ePCR) commenced, allowing a more complete picture of each individual patient’s acute episode to be provided to the receiving ED, and plans for the next phase of roll-out are on target.
New key performance indicators and a framework for their implementation were developed, with planned pilot testing to commence in 2018.
Deploying the most appropriate resources safely, quickly and efficiently •
To ensure that the NAS fleet and equipment are cost effective, maintained to a high standard and capable of meeting future models of service delivery, a fleet and equipment plan has been implemented with monthly status reports provided.
The NAS was announced as the winner in the Public Service category of the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland’s (SEAI) Energy Awards 2017.
This award was delivered in recognition of the NAS commitment to reducing its carbon footprint, and the sustainable energy options that are now available in the NAS fleet including 50 of the new vehicles being equipped with solar panels.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Acute Hospital Care
Acute hospitals provide a wide range of services including inpatient, day case, outpatient, emergency, diagnostic, maternity and cancer services.
In 2017, the demand for services continued to increase in line with a growing and ageing population and the focus remained on providing quality safe services to service users.
The National Patient
Experience Survey, the first of its kind in Ireland and a joint initiative between HIQA, the HSE and DoH, took place in
26,635 patients from 40 acute hospitals were invited to participate, and the survey had a response rate of 51%.
While 79% of respondents rated their hospital experience as good or very good, 16% rated their experience as fair to poor, with patients admitted to hospital in an emergency giving lower ratings of overall experience of care than those patients whose stay in hospital was planned in advance.
Pictured at the launch of the survey were:
Phelim, CEO, HIQA
Minister for Health HSE.
Key concerns for patients related to their experience of ED, care on the ward, communication and information and the discharge process.
Findings from the survey will be used to shape future healthcare policy and improve outcomes for patients.
See www.patientexperience.ie for more information.
Further information in relation to the survey can be seen on page 16 of this Annual Report.
Key priorities in 2017 were delivering care safely and efficiently, improving access to urgent and planned care and improving the patient experience. •
Delivering quality care through our Hospital Groups •
To build quality and patient safety capacity across hospitals, an analysis of resources is on-going and the roll-out of phase 2 of the National Incident Management System (NIMS) continues in acute hospitals.
Acute Hospital Care Monitoring and controlling healthcare associated infections •
Some of our Activity in 2017 • 1,708,059 patients were discharged from hospital – 635,663 inpatient and 1,072,396 day case – an increase of 21,900 compared to 2016.
• 1,416,449 emergency presentations to acute hospitals (increase of 4%).
Increasing critical care capacity •
• 3,307,079 outpatient attendances (decrease of 0.4%).
• 1,279,712 ED attendances (increase of 3%).
• 87% of adults were waiting less than 15 months for an inpatient procedure and 93% for a day care procedure (89% and 86% respectively for children) by the end of the year.
Improving inpatient flow •
Under the Patient Flow programme, several projects commenced in Galway University Hospitals and University of Limerick Hospital, including: -
Effecting improvements in emergency surgical flow
Improving bed turnaround times and reducing delay in ED transfers
Improving discharge planning and increasing early morning discharges.
• 72% of patients were waiting less than 52 weeks for an OPD appointment by the end of the year.
• 68 patients were waiting more than four weeks for an urgent colonoscopy by year end and 58% of patients were waiting less than 13 weeks for a routine endoscopy.
Meeting the demand for unscheduled care remained challenging with a sustained increase in ED attendances.
Approximately 30,000 more people attended our EDs compared with the previous year, including an additional 8,800 patients over the age of 75.
Work continued on the ED taskforce plan recommendations in relation to patient experience time, to address the on-going pressures experienced in EDs and in particular to reduce waiting times for patients over 75 years.
Despite the increased demand, the number of patients waiting more than 24 hours in EDs reduced by approximately 1,400 patients of whom 800 were aged over 75 years.
113 additional beds had been provided in our hospitals by the end of the 2016/2017 winter initiative, with a further 74 acute beds in place by year end as part of the 2017/2018 initiative.
Further information can be seen on page 24 of this Annual Report.
Work continued on developing integrated care teams for older people in conjunction with the CHOs.
Further information in relation to this can be seen on page 24 of this Annual Report.
Improving access to urgent and planned care •
To improve hospital capacity, a number of new and replacement units opened during the year, including a 75-bed replacement ward block in University Hospital Galway and a new ED in University Hospital Limerick.
Phase 2 of the acute medical assessment unit (AMAU) in Midland Regional Hospital Portlaoise also progressed during 2017.
Work continued with the NTPF to implement waiting list initiatives, reduce waiting times and provide treatment to those patients waiting longest.
38,991 patients were identified where a 15 month waiting period would be exceeded if no action was taken and, of these, 31,600 were removed from the waiting list.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Acute Hospital Care
The scoliosis waiting list update and service development plan was developed which aimed to ensure that no scoliosis patient who required surgery would be waiting more than four months for surgery, where clinically appropriate, by the end of the year.
This initiative resulted in an increase in capacity at Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin), Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street), Cappagh National Orthopaedic Hospital and the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, and the option of surgical treatment in specialist centres in the UK, Germany and France.
Development continues of a sustained, contemporary, valuesbased and patient-centred approach to service delivery in scoliosis and orthopaedic services.
Following a national GI endoscopy demand and capacity review process, a number of initiatives were progressed including development of an action plan to improve access, establishment of a working group to improve co-ordination and communication across services, and appointment of endoscopy clinical leads to lead on service improvement at group level.
• The Outpatient Services Performance Improvement Programme (OSPIP) continues to be implemented.
Work has commenced on referral pathways for seven specialties and the design of the urology prototype pathway has been completed.
Recruitment is being progressed, in line with the recommendations of the Independent Clinical Review of provision of a Second Catheterisation Laboratory at University Hospital Waterford (Herity Report), to provide additional weekly planned cardiac catheterisation laboratory sessions.
A mobile cardiac catheterisation laboratory is in place in the interim.
Both the National Rare Diseases Office and the National Clinical Programme for Rare Diseases are working with healthcare providers to encourage them to sign up to be listed on Orphanet (a panEuropean database of expertise in the area of rare disease).
By the end of the year a total of 51 centres of expertise in Ireland were validated and listed on Orphanet.
Guidelines have been developed for the prescribing of two multiple sclerosis drugs, Infliximab and Lemtrada. •
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Organ Donation and Transplantation
Organ Donation and Transplant Ireland (ODTI) continued to raise awareness of the importance of organ donation nationally.
In 2017, 311 organ transplants including five pancreatic transplants were completed and there were a total of 150 donations from living and deceased donors.
A number of initiatives were progressed during the year in relation to paediatric care including: -
Recruitment of additional paediatric consultants to support the Waterford paediatric project.
The capital project for the new children’s hospital including outpatients and urgent care centres at Tallaght and Connolly Hospitals.
The Children’s Hospital Integration Programme which will integrate the three children’s hospitals in advance of the new children’s hospital opening.
Expansion of the all-island paediatric cardiology service to provide urgent cardiothoracic surgery and emergency surgery for children from Northern Ireland.
Cardiac catheterisation activity has also increased with children from Northern Ireland accessing this service in less than 12 weeks.
Implementation of the screening programme for infants at risk of developmental dysplasia of the hip is taking place in three Hospital Groups (South/South West, RCSI and Saolta) and national standards have been developed and communicated.
Acute Hospital Care
National Women and Infants’ Health Programme The National Women and Infants’ Health Programme (NWIHP) was established in January.
Implementing the National Maternity Strategy 2016-2026 •
An implementation plan for the National Maternity Strategy 2016-2026, including actions to address inequities in the availability of anomaly scanning, was launched, focusing on the four key themes of the strategy: -
Adopting a health and wellbeing approach to ensure that babies get the best start in life so that mothers and families are supported and empowered to improve their own health and wellbeing.
Providing access to safe, high quality, nationally consistent, women-centred maternity care.
Recognising pregnancy as a normal physiological process and facilitating a woman’s choice insofar as it is safe to do so.
Ensuring maternity services are appropriately resourced, underpinned by strong and effective leadership, management and governance arrangements, and delivered by a skilled and competent workforce in partnership with women.
Maternity networks are established or are being established in six hospital groups, with directors of midwifery appointed to most maternity hospitals.
To improve clinical management, communication and effective planning of care, the maternal and newborn clinical management system (MN CMS) went live in a further two sites this year.
(Phase 1 of implementation of the system includes Cork University Maternity Hospital, University Hospital Kerry, the National Maternity Hospital and Rotunda Hospital).
Planning for the relocation of the National Maternity Hospital, Dublin is well advanced and planning work continues on the relocation of University Maternity Hospital Limerick and the other Dublin maternity hospitals.
The appointment of bereavement specialists for all maternity units is progressing as part of a range of improvement actions based on the National Standards for Bereavement Care following Pregnancy Loss and Perinatal Death.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Acute Hospital Care
Cancer Services
During the year, the new National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026 was published by the DoH.
Implementation of its recommendations will help to address some of the deficits in cancer services nationally.
Implementing the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026 •
Luke’s Hospital, part of the St. Luke’s Radiation Oncology Network (SLRON).
The new Linacs will each treat an average of 30 patients per day, increasing capacity for cancer treatment within SLRON and, ultimately, survival rates for cancer patients.
Additionally, cross-border collaboration continued at the North West cancer centre at Altnagelvin as part of the national programme for radiation oncology.
- 83% of lung cancer patients were seen or were offered an appointment within 10 working days.
62% of prostate cancer patients were seen or were offered an appointment within 20 working days.
76% of patients undergoing radical radiotherapy treatment commenced treatment within 15 days.
Screening programmes for breast, cervical and bowel cancer continued and, for breast cancer, the programme was extended.
Work is on-going with the DoH and other stakeholders on: -
Supporting integrated care between GPs and clinical colleagues to enhance cancer prevention and early detection.
Continuing the centralisation of cancer surgery.
Initiatives are underway in each of the eight cancer centres, driving process improvement and efficiency and enhancements to the rare specialist cancer patient pathways.
To optimise the safe delivery of systemic cancer treatment, including ePrescribing and eAdministration of chemotherapy, the design and configuration of a medical oncology clinical information system (MOCIS) was completed (see also page 87 of this Annual Report).
Performance improvement
While challenges remain in meeting performance targets, achievements were seen in a number of areas:
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026
In July, Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD launched the National Cancer Strategy 2017-2026.
The strategy sets out four goals: • Reduce the cancer burden.
• Provide optimal care.
• Maximise patient involvement and quality of life.
• Enable and assure change.
Key recommendations in the strategy include: • Development of a cancer prevention function.
• Expansion of BowelScreen through appropriate endoscopy capacity.
• Enhancement of care pathways between primary and secondary care for specific cancers.
• Development of referral criteria to ensure GPs have direct access to cancer diagnostics.
• Appointment of national leads for cancer molecular diagnostics, geriatric oncology and cancer nursing.
• Designation of an age appropriate facility for adolescents and young adults with cancer within the new children’s hospital.
• Development of palliative care services within the cancer centres.
• A clearly defined framework in place for cancer patient safety and quality.
• Cancer consultants and advanced nurse practitioners to have protected time to pursue research interests.
• Development, publishing and monitoring of a programme of national quality healthcare indicators for cancer care.
Hospital Groups
Delivery of acute services through the seven Hospital Groups is part of a significant reform programme which aims to improve the quality and efficiency of care to patients.
Many service improvements took place within our Hospital Groups during the year and a flavour of these is included over the following pages.
Hospital Groups
Children’s Hospital Group • • •
Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street) National Children’s Hospital (Tallaght) Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin)
Academic partners • University College Dublin • Royal College of Surgeons Ireland • Trinity College Dublin
Dublin City University National University of Ireland Galway
University College Cork
University of Limerick
Families and children attending Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street) can now escape from the hospital to a nearby garden retreat.
The privately established garden is adjacent to a six-family facility called Hugh’s House, which is providing long-term accommodation for parents of children attending the hospital.
Pictured: Jack Harmes (9) from Castleknock, Dublin with Ade Stack, mother of Hugh Curley in whose memory the house and garden have been created.
(Photographer: Andres Poveda)
A significant milestone was reached in the development of the new children’s hospital with the announcement that the investment required to award the construction contracts had been approved by Government.
This was followed by the casting of the foundation stone by former Taoiseach, Enda Kenny TD and members of the Youth Advisory Council (current and former users of children’s hospital services).
The children and the Taoiseach embedded their hands into a mould which will be cast in cement and incorporated into the new hospital.
Progress continued on the implementation of the Children’s Hospital Programme, a significant investment and change management programme, in partnership with the DoH.
The programme’s aims are to: -
Progress the transition to a new single legal entity during 2018.
Mobilise the required ICT projects.
Continue to act as client for the capital project to build the new children’s hospital and two paediatric outpatient and urgent care centres.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street) received the Improving Our Children’s Health Award at the Health Service Excellence Awards for its influenza vaccination campaign.
A number of innovative activities took place among hospital staff resulting in the hospital achieving the highest uptake rate of the vaccination in the health service.
Children’s University Hospital (Temple Street) developed a website www.sportsinjuries.ie to provide advice on first aid for children’s sports injuries.
As a website, this free resource is quickly accessible via a smartphone, providing assistance in recognising potentially serious injuries and taking the appropriate steps.
Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital (Crumlin) celebrated Universal Children’s Day with a number of activities, including an art competition and a quiz, bringing lots of fun to children in the hospital.
Hospital Groups
Dublin Midlands Hospital Group
Coombe Women and Infants University Hospital
Naas General Hospital
St. James’s Hospital
Trinity College Dublin
The Dublin Midlands Hospital Group launched its Healthy Ireland Implementation Plan 2018-2020.
The plan sets out a three-year road map for improving the physical and mental health of staff, patients and the wider public.
Dr Susan, CEO Dublin Midlands Hospital Group; Minister of State for Health Promotion and the National Drugs Strategy, Catherine TD; Dr Áine, National Director, Clinical Strategy and Programmes with Lucy and Lilly.
A five year strategic plan was developed during 2017 and is due to be published in January 2018.
The strategy focuses on five key aims
delivering excellent standards of quality and patient safety
optimising service delivery
developing integrated care between the group and its community partners
fostering education research and innovation
and strengthening co-operation and collaboration between the hospitals
with the overall objective of supporting, sustaining and developing each hospital to deliver high quality care for patients.
The team at the Midland Regional Hospital Tullamore were highly commended for their work on the trauma assessment clinic project in the category for Excellence in Patient Flow Management Award at the Health Service Excellence Awards.
The service uses a team approach that improves and streamlines the patient journey after an injury.
An event was held at St. James’s Hospital to mark 50 years of nursing training and education.
Over 250 nurses attended, including some from the very first intake in 1967.
Since the beginning of the programme, the size of classes at the hospital has grown from less than 20 students to 75.
Tallaght Hospital became the first public hospital in Ireland to pilot a new, minimally invasive technology to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), commonly known as an enlarged prostate gland.
A key benefit of this approach is that the procedure can be completed under local rather than general anaesthetic, which reduces the typical length of stay required in hospital afterwards.
A Winter Ready campaign was launched at Tallaght Hospital.
The public information campaign is designed to empower people to better manage their health to protect themselves, prepare for and prevent the impacts of winter illness.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Hospital Groups
Ireland East Hospital Group
Cappagh National Orthopaedic Hospital Mater Misericordiae University Hospital Midland Regional Hospital Mullingar National Maternity Hospital Our Lady’s Hospital (Navan)
Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital
St. Columcille’s Hospital (Loughlinstown)
St. Luke’s General Hospital (Carlow/Kilkenny)
St. Michael’s Hospital (Dun Laoghaire)
St. Vincent’s University Hospital
Wexford General Hospital
Academic partner
University College Dublin
The Mater Misericordiae University Hospital launched a new Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) laboratory.
This worldclass laboratory houses gene sequencing equipment enabling germline testing for the population.
Patients, and their families, suffering from heart disease, blindness and cancer will benefit from genetic testing provided by this equipment and the NGS Laboratory.
(The new gene sequencing equipment was donated by Shabra Charity)
Pictured: Staff working in the NGS laboratory.
St. Vincent’s University Hospital won the Best Integration Award at the Health Service Excellence Awards in December for its introduction of an acute diabetic foot pathway.
Through this project, length of stay for patients has greatly reduced, with fewer major limb amputations and fewer re-admissions.
A new cataract unit was officially opened at the Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital which, when fully operational, will increase capacity by over 3,000 cases per year.
At the Hospital Professional Awards, a HSE Innovation and Service Development Award was given to the Diabetes Department at St. Luke’s General Hospital (Carlow/Kilkenny) for a pilot programme offering brief and long-term art psychotherapy to support individuals, and their families, in the paediatric services with a diagnosis of Type 1 diabetes.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
In a major step forward for women and infants’ healthcare in Ireland, planning permission was granted for the new National Maternity Hospital on the St. Vincent’s University Hospital campus.
A design team was appointed to draft a site development plan for the future phased development of the Midland Regional Hospital Mullingar.
Cappagh National Orthopaedic Hospital has teamed up with the National Dairy Council to help promote the importance of a healthy diet for bone health.
Over 20,000 patients annually avail of the hospital’s services as inpatients, outpatients and day cases.
Hospital Groups
RCSI Hospital Group
Beaumont Hospital
Cavan General Hospital
Connolly Hospital
Louth County Hospital
Monaghan Hospital
Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital
Rotunda Hospital
Royal College of Surgeons Ireland
Former patients Haifa, Fariah and Hania Khan, and their parents, Liga and Nasir, pictured with Prof Afif EL-Khuffash
The frail intervention therapy team, at Beaumont Hospital were successful at the Health Service Excellence Awards, receiving the Supporting a Healthy Community Award.
The team developed a whole system pathway for frail older people, promoting a successful home first ethos which reduced patients’ length of stay.
Staff Recognition Awards were hosted to celebrate Beaumont Hospital’s 30 Year Anniversary.
The awards recognised individuals and teams who contributed to the provision of high quality patient and customer care and were identified as going above and beyond their duties to create a positive working environment.
A foetal anomaly scanning service commenced in Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital and Cavan General Hospital and plans are in place to expand this into a fuller service as the skilled workforce is recruited and developed.
Over 4,000 patients had their care managed using a new approach which maximised usage of all facilities, particularly theatre/diagnostics (endoscopy) capacity across the group.
A Rotunda Hospital initiative providing lactation support for premature babies has been awarded Patient Education Project of the Year at the Irish Healthcare Awards.
The aim of this initiative was the targeted provision of lactation support for mothers of premature babies within the neonatal unit (NICU) to improve provision of breast milk for these vulnerable babies.
Expansion continued of the Our Lady of Lourdes campus project with the opening of a 29-bed single roomed ward.
Connolly Hospital was successful at the Health Service Excellence Awards receiving the Improving Efficiency and Value in Healthcare Award for its project, Advancing the Role of the Pharmacy Technician and Delivering Better Value for Money on Hospital Drug Spend.
This project ensures that patient demand for medication of the highest quality is met while also delivering savings in drug spend.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Hospital Groups
Saolta University Health Care Group
Letterkenny University Hospital
Mayo University Hospital
Merlin Park University Hospital
Portiuncula University Hospital
Roscommon University Hospital
Sligo University Hospital
University Hospital Galway
National University of Ireland Galway
As part of a Saolta initiative recognising that health and wellbeing are affected by the physical environment in which people work and stay, a sculpture entitled ‘Transit’ was created and donated to Sligo University Hospital by local artist Páraic McGloughlin, assisted by his father Páraic MacLochlainn.
The sculpture represents the transition from sickness to health.
University Hospital Galway won the Popular Choice Award at the Health Service Excellence Awards for its serum eye drop programme.
Serum eye (SE) drops are used to treat a range of ocular surface disorders and the hospital is the only one in Ireland licensed to produce SEs.
Further detail on this can be seen on page 29 of this Annual Report.
Galway University Hospitals (University Hospital Galway and Merlin Park University Hospital) showcased the expertise of the Interventional Radiology Department when they hosted live cases for an international conference which took place in Germany.
Interventional radiology is a medical specialty providing minimally invasive image-guided diagnosis and treatment of diseases in every organ system.
The catering department at Roscommon University Hospital was awarded Hear Me! certification in May.
Hear Me aims to promote understanding and awareness of communication impairment and equip people with the tools and strategies needed to create a communicationfriendly environment.
• Portiuncula University Hospital celebrated the Hospice Friendly
Hospitals Programme by hosting an information campaign which aimed to promote and celebrate the progress on end of life care in the hospital.
Sligo University Hospital in collaboration with Sligo IT piloted the first MedEx programme outside of Dublin City University since its establishment in 2006.
MedEx is a novel, community-based rehabilitation and exercise programme for people with a chronic illness or disease.
Mayo University Hospital launched a Patient and Family Engagement committee, recruiting 16 patient advisors to help the hospital promote meaningful engagement with patients.
The hospital is the first in the country to undertake such a venture, based on the Canadian Patient and Family Engagement Model.
Hospital Groups
South/South West Hospital Group
Bantry General Hospital
Cork University Hospital
Lourdes Orthopaedic Hospital
Mallow General Hospital
Mercy University Hospital
University Hospital Kerry
University Hospital Waterford
University College Cork
Pictured at the celebration of Cork University Maternity Hospital’s 10th birthday were John, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, and Olive, Director of Midwifery, with Kacper, the first baby born at the hospital.
University Hospital Waterford received the Excellence in Quality Care Award at the Health Service Excellence Awards for its nurse-led peripherally inserted central catheters (PICC) line insertion service.
Prior to the development of this service, PICC lines were typically inserted by a consultant interventional radiologist and the nurse-led service has significantly reduced the length of time patients need to wait.
The South/South West Hospital Group held its inaugural Peri-operative Conference in University Hospital Waterford at the end of the year, with over 170 delegates in attendance.
There were celebrations at University Hospital Waterford when two of its nurses received an Award for Excellence in Cardiovascular Care at the international EuroHeartCare conference in Sweden for their case study on the effects of protein supplements on the cardiovascular system.
The maternal and newborn clinical management system (MN CMS) went live in University Hospital Kerry, enhancing care for patients through the use of an electronic rather than paper record.
Several capital projects were progressed to enhance patient services: -
Opening of an 11-bay day surgery unit in South Tipperary General Hospital.
Approval received to develop a 40-bed modular build in South Tipperary General Hospital.
Development of a palliative care unit, stroke unit and discharge lounge at University Hospital Kerry.
Development commenced of a five storey building in University Hospital Waterford to incorporate a palliative care unit over two floors and acute medical/surgical specialties over three floors.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Hospital Groups
UL Hospitals Group
Croom Orthopaedic Hospital
Ennis Hospital
Nenagh Hospital
St. John’s Hospital
University Hospital Limerick
University Maternity Hospital Limerick
University of Limerick
One of Ireland’s largest EDs opened in University Hospital Limerick.
The ED has increased capacity for patients and was designed with the input of senior clinicians to improve patient flow, reduce patient experience times and improve outcomes for patients.
Pictured in the new resuscitation area at the ED are nurses Ingrid Byrne and Siobhan O’Grady.
14,000 patients in need of acute medical care received appointments through the Bed Bureau at UL Hospitals Group in its first full year of operation.
The Bed Bureau receives calls directly from GPs, minimising the risk of unnecessary waits in the ED by offering an appointment at one of the medical assessment units in University Hospital Limerick, St. John’s Hospital, Nenagh Hospital or Ennis Hospital.
A series of public lectures commenced as part of UL Hospitals Group Healthy Ireland programme.
The programme is committed to greater engagement with the public on health promotion and prevention of illness.
The Charles Centre, the new centre for specialist dermatological services at University Hospital Limerick, was officially opened.
It provides new treatments, added capacity and a much improved environment for patients with skin conditions and skin cancers. •
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
University Maternity Hospital Limerick is leading in the development of a perinatal mental health service in line with the National Maternity Strategy 2016-2026 and the national model of care.
A consultant psychiatrist and a clinical midwifery manager were appointed and an international conference on perinatal mental health was held in partnership with CHO 3.
Live streaming commenced of robotic surgical procedures from the operating room in University Hospital Limerick to the new Clinical Education and Research Centre (CERC) auditorium, as part of the educational component of the robotic surgical programme.
Supporting Service Delivery
Support services are key enablers, including National HR, National Finance, the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), Health Business Services (HBS), Communications, Emergency Management, Planning and Business Information (PBI) and Internal Audit.
National Human Resources
Communications
Committed to putting people at the heart of everything we do, reinforcing a culture of commitment, adaptability and high performance to deliver high quality safe healthcare to our service users, communities and the wider population.
Working with health and social care services nationwide, creating programmes that support a healthier population and build trust and confidence in our health service.
National Finance
Providing strategic and operational financial support, direction and advice to our services, ensuring the maximum appropriate investment in health and social care, and delivering and demonstrating value for money.
Office of the Chief Information Officer
Implementing eHealth Ireland across our health service putting technology in place which is based on patient and clinical benefit.
Health Business Services
Business division of the HSE with a portfolio of services including procurement, finance, human resources, estates, HR/payroll systems and analytics, and business excellence and innovation.
Ensuring that optimal value is achieved, allowing front line services to focus on core service provision.
Emergency Management
Planning and Business Information
Co-ordinating and overseeing the development of key organisational planning processes, and collecting and collating the information required to report on performance as set out in these plans.
Internal Audit
Identifying risks and control issues, to provide assurance on the adequacy and degree of adherence to our procedures and processes.
In conjunction with front line services, the provision of a compassionate and efficient healthcare system is dependent on having these key enabling support services in place.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Supporting Service Delivery
Some activity undertaken within supporting service delivery in 2017…
Supporting Service Delivery
National Human Resources •
The Healthy Workplaces for All Ages campaign commenced in October with the aim of reducing the number of injuries and episodes of ill-health for all employees.
The standards are grouped according to five themes – worker-centred care, safe and effective care, leadership and governance, workforce planning and the use of information.
Implementation of the activity based funding (ABF) model progressed during the year with patient level costing now live in 18 larger hospital sites.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
IHI was added to all electronic referrals from GPs to hospitals
All GP practice management systems were configured to store and display the IHI
IHIs for General Medical Services (GMS) patients were piloted with 24 volunteer GPs.
Supporting Service Delivery
During the global WannaCry ransomeware epidemic a safe and secure health system was maintained throughout the attack.
A digital solution for cancer care known as the medical oncology clinical information system (MOCIS) solution has been procured and implementation has commenced.
The technical design for a new single national medical laboratories solution has been completed and implementation has commenced.
This solution will also enable GPs to order lab tests digitally.
A decision-support referral system is being developed to upgrade the current eReferral system for outpatient services.
Health Business Services •
Health Business Services Strategy 20172019 was published, building on the progress, confidence and identity realised over the course of the initial strategy of 2014-2016.
Further detail on some of the actions included in the strategy can be seen below.
A number of programmes were put in place, including: -
The National Integrated Staff Records and Pay Programme (NiSRP).
It will provide the foundation for a strong ‘Hire to Retire’ support structure for staff, ensuring that comprehensive workforce information is available to manage resources in a way that delivers best health outcomes, improves people’s experience of using the service and demonstrates value for money.
A Pensions Programme focused on improvements for a compliant customer-centred pension service for the HSE, its employees and its pensioners.
It will implement robust processes in the area of contract and commercial compliance and is being implemented in CHOs, Hospital Groups and TUSLA.
One of the personas created at the EHR workshops.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Supporting Service Delivery
A number of capital programmes were advanced during the year, including:
• New children’s hospital project at the St. James’s Hospital campus, Dublin.
• Paediatric outpatient and urgent care centre at Connolly Hospital and enabling works at its sister facility at Tallaght Hospital, Dublin
• Commencement of construction of the National Forensic Mental Health Service Hospital at St. Ita’s Hospital campus, Portrane, Dublin.
• Commencement of construction of the National Rehabilitation Hospital at Rochestown Avenue,
• New radiation oncology unit in Cork.
Armagh Road, Crumlin Primary Care Centre.
• Planning permission granted for the development of the National Maternity Hospital at St. Vincent’s University Hospital campus, Dublin.
• Completion of the new national ambulance base at Davitt Road, Dublin.
• Delivery of four primary care centres by means of a Public Private Partnership, in a number of locations across the country.
• Commencement of a ward block at University Hospital Waterford.
Mullingar Primary Care Centre.
Cork University Hospital Paediatric Unit.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Supporting Service Delivery
Emergency Management •
Communications •
A Digital Roadmap, to transform the online user experience, continues to be developed. •
HSE social media was a leading source of information for the public during October’s Storm Ophelia with posts seen by over half a million people.
Campaigns like Ask About Alcohol, Dementia: Understand Together, #littlethings, QUIT, THINK contraception and Under the Weather, raised awareness and supported people to improve their, and their families, health and wellbeing.
A revised severe weather planning guidance and checklist document was delivered by Emergency Management, and utilised during Storm Ophelia, to assist the managers of all HSE services in preparing for, responding to and recovering from the effects of a severe weather event.
External emergency plans for top tier Seveso (Hazardous Material) sites were reviewed, updated and tested in compliance with legislation.
Planning and Business Information •
The Planning Unit co-ordinated the development and publication of the National Service Plan 2018 (together with the annual Estimates which informed preparation of the Budget for 2018) and the Annual Report 2016.
Work commenced on the development of the next Corporate Plan.
This will build on the work undertaken on the Corporate Plan 2015-2017.
The work of the National Performance Oversight Group (NPOG) was supported through the development of performance profiles as part of the performance assurance process.
Performance profiles and management data reports were developed and published online on a bi-monthly basis.
Work is underway on the development of a number of projects including a HealthStat automation project, CIF set-up, and completion of a corporate performance dashboard.
Internal Audit •
A comprehensive programme of audits, including audits of HSE funded agencies, was conducted.
Special investigations were undertaken as required.
The status of management’s implementation of audit recommendations was tracked and reported.
Advice was provided to senior management on controls and processes.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Appendix 1: Membership of Directorate and Leadership Team
Mr Tony O’Brien (Director General)
Mr Stephen Mulvany (Chief Financial Officer and Deputy Director General)
Mr Dean Sullivan (Chief Strategy and Planning Officer and Deputy Director General)
Mr John Connaghan (Chief Operations Officer and Deputy Director General)
Dr Philip Crowley (National Director, Quality Improvement)
Ms Rosarii Mannion (National Director, Human Resources)
Leadership Team as at 31st December 2017
Mr Tony O’Brien (Director General)
Mr Stephen Mulvany (Chief Financial Officer and Deputy Director General)
Mr Dean Sullivan (Deputy Director General Chief Strategy and Planning Officer)
Mr John Connaghan (Deputy Director General Chief Operations Officer)
Dr Philip Crowley (National Director, Quality Improvement)
Ms Rosarii Mannion (National Director, Human Resources)
Mr Liam Woods (National Director, Acute Hospitals)
Dr Stephanie O’Keeffe (National Director, Health and Wellbeing)
Mr John Hennessy (National Director, Primary Care)
Ms Anne O’Connor (National Director, Mental Health)
Mr Pat Healy (National Director, Social Care)
Mr Patrick Lynch (National Director, Quality Assurance and Verification)
Dr Áine Carroll (National Director, Clinical Strategy and Programmes)
Dr Jerome Coffey (National Director, National Cancer Control Programme)
Mr Damien McCallion (National Director, Emergency Management and Director General CAWT)
Ms Jane Carolan (National Director, Health Business Services and Interim Chief Information Officer)
Dr Paul Connors (National Director, Communications)
Dr Geraldine Smith (National Director, Internal Audit)
Mr Joe Ryan (A/Head of Programme for Health Service Improvement)
Mr Jim O’Sullivan (Programme Director, Office of the Director General)
Mr Dara Purcell (Corporate Secretary)
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Appendix 2: Organisational Structure As at 31st December 2017
HSE Directorate
National Director Internal Audit
Statutory Committee
• Audit Committee
National Director Quality Improvement
Standing Committees
• Risk Committee
• E-Health Committee
National Director of Human Resources
National Director Cancer Control Programme
Corporate Secretary
National Director Health Business Services
Interim Chief Information Officer
National Director Communications
National Assurance and Verification
Leadership Team
Head of Programme for Health Service Improvement
National Director Acute Hospitals
National Director Mental Health
National Director Primary Care
National Director Social Care
National Director Health and Wellbeing
National Director Emergency Management
and Director General CAWT Programme
National Director Clinical Strategy
Community Healthcare Organisations
Hospital Groups
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
% of internal audit recommendations implemented (within six months of the report being received)
% of internal audit recommendations implemented, against total no. of recommendations, within 12 months of report being received
% of the monetary value of service arrangements signed
24 hour shift (acute and mental health)
48 hour working week (acute and mental health)
% of annual compliance statements signed Workforce
% absence rates by staff category
% variation from funded staffing thresholds EWTD
Health and Safety
Safety Incident Reporting % of safety incidents being entered onto NIMS within 30 days of occurrence by Hospital Group/CHO Extreme and major safety incidents as a % of all incidents reported as occurring % of claims received by State Claims Agency that were not reported previously as an incident
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
No. of test purchases carried out under the Public Health (Sunbeds) Act, 2014
No. of mystery shopper inspections carried out under the Public Health (Sunbeds) Act, 2014
% BreastCheck screening uptake rate
% women offered hospital admission for treatment within three weeks of diagnosis of breast cancer
National Screening Service BreastCheck
No. of women in the eligible population who have had a complete mammogram
No. of unique women who have had one or more smear tests in a primary care setting BowelScreen
No. of clients who have completed a satisfactory BowelScreen FIT test
No. of Diabetic RetinaScreen clients screened with final grading result
Environmental Health
Health and Wellbeing
No. of tobacco sales to minors test purchase inspections carried out
No. of official food control planned, and planned surveillance, inspections of food businesses Tobacco
No. of smokers who received intensive cessation support from a cessation counsellor No. of frontline staff trained in brief intervention smoking cessation
Chronic Disease Management
No. of people who have completed a structured patient education programme for diabetes Public Health
No. of infectious disease (ID) outbreaks notified under the national ID reporting schedule Performance indicators
National Screening Service Breast Check
CervicalCheck % eligible women with at least one satisfactory CervicalCheck screening in a five year period BowelScreen % of client uptake rate in the BowelScreen programme Diabetic RetinaScreen % Diabetic RetinaScreen uptake rate
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
% of healthcare workers who have received seasonal flu vaccine in the 2016-2017 influenza season (acute hospitals)
% of healthcare workers who have received seasonal flu vaccine in the 2016-2017 influenza season (long term care facilities in the community)
% uptake in flu vaccine for those aged 65 and older with a medical card or GP visit card
% children aged 24 months who have received 3 doses of the 6 in1 vaccine
% children aged 24 months who have received the measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine
% of first year girls who have received two doses of HPV vaccine
Health and Wellbeing
Tobacco % of smokers on cessation programmes who were quit at one month
Immunisation
(i) Introduction of HPV testing in colposcopy and HPV triage for some clients has reduced the frequency of screening tests required.
There is no reduction in population coverage of the programme.
Volume Activity and Key Performance Indicators
Early discharge (includes OPAT)
Unscheduled referrals from community sources
New metric 2017
Primary Care
Volume activity
Community Intervention Teams (no. of referrals) Admission avoidance (includes OPAT)
Community Healthcare
Hospital avoidance
GP Activity
No. of contacts with GP Out of Hours Service Therapies/Community Healthcare Network Services Total no. of patients seen
Physiotherapy
Occupational Therapy
Speech and Language Therapy
Podiatry
Ophthalmology
Audiology
Dietetics
Psychology
Nursing
Community Healthcare
Paediatric Homecare Packages
No. of packages (based on average cost per package of €0.075m)
GP Trainees
No. of trainees
National Virus Reference Laboratory No. of tests
Healthcare Associated Infections: Medication Management Consumption of antibiotics in community settings (defined daily doses per 1,000 population)
Health Amendment Act: Services to persons with State Acquired Hepatitis C No. of Health Amendment Act Card Holders who were reviewed
% of new patients seen for assessment within 12 weeks
% on waiting list for assessment ≤ 52 weeks
% of new service users seen for assessment within 12 weeks
% on waiting list for assessment ≤ 52 weeks
Performance indicators
Nursing % of new patients accepted onto the caseload and seen within 12 weeks
Physiotherapy
Occupational Therapy HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
% of children reaching ten months within the reporting period who have had child development health screening on time or before reaching ten months of age
% of newborn babies visited by a PHN within 72 hours of discharge from maternity services
% of babies breastfed (exclusively and not exclusively) at first PHN visit
% of babies breastfed (exclusively and not exclusively) at three month PHN visit
Speech and Language Therapy
Podiatry
Ophthalmology
Community Healthcare
Audiology
Dietetics
Psychology
Oral Health % of new patients who commenced treatment within three months of assessment
Orthodontics % of referrals seen for assessment within six months Reduce the proportion of patients on the treatment waiting list longer than four years (grade IV and V) Child Health
% of substance misusers (over 18 years) for whom treatment has commenced within one calendar month following assessment
% of substance misusers (under 18 years) for whom treatment has commenced within one week following assessment
Social Inclusion
Volume activity
Opioid Substitution
No. of clients in receipt of opioid substitution treatment (outside prisons) Needle Exchange
No. of unique individuals attending pharmacy needle exchange
Homeless Services
No. of service users admitted to homeless emergency accommodation hostels/facilities whose health needs have been assessed within two weeks of admission
Traveller Health
No. of people who received health information on type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular health Performance indicators
Substance Misuse
Opioid Substitution
Average waiting time from referral to assessment for opioid substitution treatment Homeless Services % of service users admitted to homeless emergency accommodation hostels/facilities whose health needs have been assessed within two weeks of admission Palliative Care
Volume activity
Inpatient Palliative Care Services No. accessing specialist inpatient bed (during the reporting month)
Community Palliative Care Services No. of patients who received specialist palliative care treatment in their normal place of residence in the month
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
No. of children in the care of the children’s outreach nurse
No. of children in the care of the specialist paediatric palliative care team in an acute hospital setting (during the reporting month)
Access to specialist palliative care services in the community provided within seven days (normal place of residence)
% of patients triaged within one working day of referral (community)
No. of long term illness claims
No. of drug payment scheme claims
Children’s Palliative Care Services
Performance indicators
Inpatient Unit – Waiting Times
Community Healthcare Access to specialist inpatient bed within seven days
Community Palliative Care Services
Volume activity
No. of prescriptions (GMS)
No. of high tech drugs claims No. of dental treatments
No. of community ophthalmic services treatments General Medical Services Scheme Total no. items prescribed
Long Term Illness Scheme
Total no. items prescribed
Drug Payment Scheme
Total no. items prescribed
% of completed medical card/GP visit card applications processed within 15 days
% of medical card/GP visit card applications, assigned for medical officer review, processed within five days
% of medical card/GP visit card applications which are accurately processed from a financial perspective by National Medical Card Unit staff
No. of children attending CAMHs
No. of CAMHs referrals seen by mental health services
No. of CAMHs inpatient units
No. of CAMHs inpatient beds
Total no. to be seen for a first appointment at the end of each month
Total no. to be seen 0-3 months
Total no. on waiting list for a first appointment waiting > 3 months
Total no. on waiting list for a first appointment waiting > 12 months
No. of adult inpatient units, including psychiatry of old age
No. of adult inpatient beds, including psychiatry of old age
Performance indicators
Medical Cards
Mental Health
Volume activity
Community Healthcare
CAMHs
No. of admissions to CAMHs acute inpatient units
General Adult
No. of adult referrals seen by mental health services
No. of admissions to adult acute inpatient units Psychiatry of Old Age
No. of psychiatry of old age referrals seen by mental health services
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks/three months by General Adult Community Mental Health Team
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks/three months by General Adult Community Mental Health Team
% of new (including re-referred) General Adult Community Mental Health Team cases offered appointment and DNA in the current month
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks/three months by Psychiatry of Old Age Community Mental Health Teams
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks/three months by Psychiatry of Old Age Community Mental Health Teams
Admissions of children to Child and Adolescent Acute Inpatient Units as a % of the total no. of admissions of children to mental health acute inpatient units
% of bed days used in HSE Child and Adolescent Acute Inpatient Units as a total of bed days used by children in mental health acute inpatient units
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment within 12 weeks/three months by Child and Adolescent Community Mental Health Teams
% of accepted referrals/re-referrals offered first appointment and seen within 12 weeks/three months by Child and Adolescent Community Mental Health Teams
% of new (including re-referred) child/adolescent referrals offered appointment and DNA in the current month
Total no. of preliminary screenings for adults under 65 years
Total no. of preliminary screenings for adults aged 65 and over
% of CHO Heads of Social Care who can evidence implementation of the HSE’s Safeguarding Vulnerable Persons at Risk of Abuse policy throughout the CHO as set out in Section 4 of the policy
% of CHO Heads of Social Care that have established CHO wide organisational arrangements required by the HSE’s Safeguarding Vulnerable Persons at Risk of Abuse policy throughout the CHO as set out in Section 9.2 of the policy
Performance indicators
Safeguarding
% of preliminary screenings for adults with an outcome of reasonable grounds for concern that are submitted to the safeguarding and protection teams accompanied by an interim safeguarding plan • Adults aged 65 and over • Adults under 65 years
Community Healthcare
Disability Services
Residential Places
No. of residential places for people with a disability
New Emergency Places and Supports Provided to People with a Disability No. of new emergency places provided to people with a disability
No. of new home support/in home respite supports for emergency cases
Total no. of new residential emergency and support places
Congregated Settings
Facilitate the movement of people from congregated to community settings
Respite Services
No. of day only respite sessions accessed by people with a disability
Disability Act Compliance
No. of requests for assessments received
Progressing Disability Services for Children and Young People (0-18s) Programme No. of Children’s Disability Network Teams established (total of 129 by the end of 2017)
No. of people with a disability in receipt of work/ work-like activity services (ID/autism and physical and sensory disability
No. of people (all disabilities) in receipt of rehabilitation training (RT)
No. of PA service hours delivered to adults with a physical and/or sensory disability
No. of adults with a physical and/or sensory disability in receipt of a PA service
No. of home support hours delivered to persons with a disability
No. of people with a disability in receipt of home support services (ID/autism and physical and sensory disability)
% compliance with inspected outcomes following HIQA inspection of disability residential units
In respect of agencies in receipt of €3m or more in public funding, the % which employ an internationally recognised quality improvement methodology such as EFQM, CQL or CARF
School Leavers % of school leavers and rehabilitation training (RT) graduates who have been provided with a placement Transforming Lives – VfM Policy Review Deliver on VfM implementation priorities Service Improvement Team Process
Deliver on service improvement priorities
No. of NHSS beds in public long stay units
No. of short stay beds in public long stay units
Average weekly transitional care beds available to acute hospitals
No. of people at any given time being supported through transitional care in alternative care settings
No. of persons in acute hospitals approved for transitional care to move to alternative care settings
% of clients with NHSS who are in receipt of ancillary state support
% of clients who have Common Summary Assessment Reports (CSARs) processed within six weeks
Older Persons’ Services
Home Care Packages (HCPs)
Home Help Hours No. of home help hours provided for all care groups (excluding provision of hours from HCPs) No. of people in receipt of home help hours (excluding provision of hours from HCPs) Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS)
Community Healthcare
No. of persons funded under NHSS in long term residential care at year end
Average length of stay for NHSS clients in public, private and saver long stay units Transitional Care
Performance indicators
Service User Experience % of CHOs who have established a Residents’ Council/Family Forum/Service User Panel or equivalent for Services for Older People by Q3 Service Improvement Team Process
Deliver on service improvement priorities Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS)
Home Care Packages % of clients in receipt of an intensive HCP with a key worker assigned
(ii) NSP 2017 target was 129 by end of 2017.
Of this, 56 had been established leaving 73 to be established in 2017.
(iii) Previous target of 23,603 amended in agreement with DoH in October 2017.
No. of clinical status 1 ECHO calls activated
No. of clinical status 1 ECHO calls arrived at scene (excludes those stood down en route)
No. of clinical status 1 DELTA calls activated
No. of clinical status 1 DELTA calls arrived at scene (excludes those stood down en route)
Total no. of AS3 calls (inter-hospital transfers)
No. of intermediate care vehicle (ICV) transfer calls
% of clinical status 1 ECHO incidents responded to by a patient-carrying vehicle in 18 minutes and 59 seconds or less
% of clinical status 1 DELTA incidents responded to by a patient-carrying vehicle in 18 minutes and 59 seconds or less
% ECHO calls which had a resource allocated within 90 seconds of call start
% DELTA calls which had a resource allocated within 90 seconds of call start
National Ambulance Service
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
Aeromedical service (Department of Defence) – Hours Irish Coast Guard (Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport) – Calls Performance indicators
Clinical Outcome
Return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) at hospital in bystander witnessed out of hospital cardiac arrest with initial shockable rhythm, using the Utstein comparator group calculation
Audit
National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) Tallaght and Ballyshannon
– % of control centres that carry out Advanced Quality Assurance Audits (AQuA) National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) Tallaght and Ballyshannon
– % medical priority dispatch system (MPDS) protocol compliance Emergency Response Times
Intermediate Care Service % of all transfers provided through the intermediate care service
Ambulance Turnaround Times % of ambulance turnaround delays escalated where ambulance crews were not cleared nationally in 60 minutes (from ambulance arrival time through clinical handover in ED or specialist unit to when the ambulance crew declares readiness of the ambulance to accept another call) in line with the process/flow path in the ambulance turnaround framework
Day case (includes dialysis)
Total inpatient and day case
Return ED attendances
Injury unit attendances
Other emergency presentations
% of adults waiting < 15 months for an elective procedure (inpatient)
% of adults waiting < 15 months for an elective procedure (day case)
% of children waiting < 15 months for an elective procedure (inpatient)
% of children waiting < 15 months for an elective procedure (day case)
% of people waiting < 52 weeks for first access to OPD services
% of all attendees at ED who are discharged or admitted within six hours of registration
% of all attendees at ED who are discharged or admitted within nine hours of registration (goal is 100% performance with a target of ≥ 5% improvement in 2017 against 2016 outturn)
% of ED patients who leave before completion of treatment
% of all attendees at ED who are in ED < 24 hours
% of all attendees aged 75 years and over at ED who are discharged or admitted within six hours of registration
% of patients 75 years or over who were admitted or discharged from ED within nine hours
% of medical patients who are discharged or admitted from AMAU within six hours AMAU registration
% of all medical admissions via AMAU
% of elective surgical inpatients who had principal procedure conducted on day of admission
% day case rate for Elective Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy
Colonoscopy/Gastrointestinal Service No. of people waiting > four weeks for access to an urgent colonoscopy
% of people waiting < 13 weeks following a referral for routine colonoscopy or OGD
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
Emergency Care and Patient Experience Time
% of all attendees aged 75 years and over at ED who are discharged or admitted within 24 hours of registration
Ambulance Turnaround Times % of ambulances that have a time interval of ≤ 60 minutes from arrival at ED to when the ambulance crew declares the readiness of the ambulance to accept another call (clear and available) Average Length of Stay (ALOS)
ALOS for all inpatient discharges excluding LOS over 30 days Medical
Medical patient average length of stay
% of emergency re-admissions for acute medical conditions to the same hospital within 30 days of discharge Surgery
Surgical patient average length of stay
Rate of new cases
of hospital acquired
Staph. Aureus bloodstream infection
C. Difficile infection
10,000 bed days used
Reporting to commence in 2017
Data not available
% of hospitals with implementation of NEWS in all clinical areas of acute hospitals and single specialty hospitals
% of all clinical staff who have been trained in the COMPASS programme
% of maternity units/hospitals with an implementation plan for the guideline for clinical handover in maternity services
% of acute hospitals with an implementation plan for the guideline for clinical handover
Pre-Hospital and Acute Hospital Care
% compliance of hospital staff with the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) five moments of hand hygiene using the national hand hygiene audit tool
Rate of slip, trip or fall incidents as reported in the month to NIMS that were classified as major or extreme
Medication Safety
Rate of medication errors incidents as reported in the month to NIMS that were classified as major or extreme
Patient Experience % of Hospital Groups conducting annual patient experience surveys amongst representative samples of their patient population
National Early Warning Score (NEWS)
Irish Maternity Early Warning Score (IMEWS)
% of maternity units/hospitals with full implementation of IMEWS
% of hospitals with implementation of IMEWS for pregnant patients
Clinical Guidelines
National Standards
% of hospitals who have completed first assessment against the NSSBH
% of hospitals who have completed second assessment against the NSSBH
% of patients with confirmed acute ischaemic stroke who receive thrombolysis
% of hospital stay for acute stroke patients in stroke unit who are admitted to an acute or combined stroke unit
% STEMI patients (without contraindication to reperfusion therapy) who get PPCI
% of reperfused STEMI patients (or LBBB) who get timely PPCI
EWTD Compliance for NCHDs – < 24 hour shift
EWTD Compliance for NCHDs – < 48 hour working week
% of attendances whose referrals were triaged as urgent by the cancer centre and adhered to the national standard of two weeks for urgent referrals
% of attendances whose referrals were triaged as non-urgent by the cancer centre and adhered to the national standard of 12 weeks for non-urgent referrals (% offered an appointment that falls within 12 weeks)
% of patients attending lung rapid clinics who attended or were offered an appointment within 10 working days of receipt of referral in designated cancer centres
Clinical detection rate: % of new attendances to clinic, triaged as urgent, that have a subsequent primary diagnosis of lung cancer
% of patients attending prostate rapid clinics who attended or were offered an appointment within 20 working days of receipt of referral in the cancer centres
Clinical detection rate: % of new attendances to clinic, triaged as urgent, that have a subsequent primary diagnosis of prostate cancer
% maternity units which have completed and published Maternity Patient Safety Statement and discussed same at hospital management team meetings each month Stroke
Provision of a diabetic centre to facilitate the commencement of a paediatric insulin pump service
Provision of a neuroscience facility in Molloway House, The Mall, Sligo Town (HSE owned).
Funded by the North West Neurology Institute
Pre-Hospital And Acute Hospital Care
Redevelopment of Mid-Western Regional Hospital, Ennis (phase 1) to include fit out of vacated areas in existing building to accommodate physiotherapy and pharmacy and development of a local (minor) injuries unit
Acute MAU and OPD reconfiguration.
The AMAU will be accommodated in the (old) Ward 6A and adjacent areas
Reconfiguration of former ICU to create a surgical and preoperative assessment unit
Clinical education and research centre (co-funded with University of Limerick)
Refurbishment of existing operation theatre fabric
Laboratory Development – extension and refurbishment of existing pathology laboratory to facilitate management services tender (blood science project)
New decontamination unit
Provision of interim facilities, (phase 2 – radiation/oncology project)
St. Luke’s Hospital
Upgrade/refurbishment of area HQ Building, Manorhamilton
Provision of a network of storage facilities to facilitate the reconfiguration of the HSE’s logistics services
Health Business Services
Ward block extension and refurbishment programme, including 16 single rooms and 4 double rooms (part funded by the Friends of Nenagh Hospital)
Nenagh Hospital, Tipperary
Cancer Services
Pre-Hospital And Acute Hospital Care
The Sustainability Strategy for Health 2017-2019 was published, setting out the health services strategic plan to deliver on our commitment to becoming a leading sustainable organisation.
The National Ambulance Service won the Public Sector category in the SEAI’s Energy Awards 2017 for its Green Technology Initiative to reduce its fuel and carbon footprint.
HBS Procurement’s National Distribution Service based in Tullamore won the Green Transport Award 2017 for its reduction in vehicle movements and fuel usage, lowering HSE national distribution CO2 emissions by 38% in one year.
The Green Healthcare Programme continued to develop Irish healthcare waste benchmarks and ran a series of training sessions with healthcare staff to improve resource efficiency, prevent and reduce waste, maximise recycling, and conserve water.
A sustainability seminar was held in Sligo University Hospital, with a focus on delivering sustainability, through collaboration, and efficiency, through energy performance contracting.
A workshop focusing on increasing water efficiency was held in Tullamore.
Attendance at both events exceeded expectations.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Financial Governance Financial Governance
Operating and Financial Overview 2017 Introduction 2017 was the last year of the HSE’s Corporate Plan 2015-2017.
However, in the context of the Ireland of today it has been acknowledged that the current model for healthcare in Ireland requires additional reform and longer term planning. The Committee on the Future of Healthcare which was set up to achieve a cross party consensus on the future of healthcare and health policy in Ireland published the Slaintecare Report in May 2017 which is welcomed by the HSE.
Strategic Context
Annually the HSE is required to maximise the level and quality of service delivery within the limit of the resources available and also to ensure that on-going sustainable improvements are realised across the system.
In that context it is important to recognise the service demands and pressures arising from a population that is: •
Growing in numbers.
Based on Census 2016 the current population of Ireland is 4.7 million people, representing a 12% increase in population since 2005 when the HSE was established.
The ERSI1* has projected that the population will increase by up to 23% between now and 2030.
Living longer.
Life expectancy in Ireland has risen 2.4 years since 2005, and almost 13% of the overall population is now 65 or older.
It is expected that the number of people aged 65 will increase by up to 21% by 2020 with the number of adults aged over 85 rising by 4%.
Although many people are living longer in better health, there are also an increasing number of older people presenting with challenges such as chronic disease, disabilities and cognitive loss.
ESRI Report, Projections of demand for healthcare in Ireland 2015-2030.
Health Service Improvement
The ambition and aim of the HSE is to deliver the best health service possible within the resources available and it is essential that our services are organised in a way that ensures they are capable of responding to the healthcare needs of our communities.
In order to achieve this a comprehensive improvement programme has been initiated which focuses on advancing the quality and safety of our services, providing care in a more integrated way and implementing public health and health promotion initiatives in line with the recommendations of the Slaintecare Report.
The Slaintecare Report acknowledges that to achieve the best outcomes for our population that safe, quality services must be provided where and when they are needed.
The establishment of Hospital Groups (HGs) and Community Health Care Organisations (CHOs) is a key element in the delivery of this strategy.
The Slaintecare Report supports the ongoing development of these HGs and CHOS and in particular seeks to ensure greater alignment between these HGs and CHOs to deliver fully integrated care and to ensure that services are provided where they are needed to achieve good and safe outcomes for the citizens of Ireland.
Financial Governance
Hospital Groups
Financial Overview
There are now seven hospital groups which are responsible for the delivery of hospital services.
These hospital groups allow a more co-ordinated approach to both the planning and delivery of acute care.
The Acute Hospital sector including National Ambulance Service accounts for almost 39% of overall HSE expenditure in recognition of the challenges faced with providing Hospital Services in the context of a rising and aging population, with a significant increase in the presentation of chronic illness as well as the impact of lifestyle choices on the health of the Irish population.
The ESRI have predicted that the demand for Hospital services is expected to rise by 37% for inpatient bed days and 30% for inpatient cases by 2030.
The HSE benefitted from an increased determination for health of €14.2 billion in 2017.
This represented an increase of €0.6 billion or 5% over the 2016 allocation.
Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs)
There are now nine regional Community Healthcare Organisations which are responsible for the delivery of community health services.
These CHOs will deliver HSE and funded agency services at local level thereby increasing access of services to people in the community.
Social Care and Primary Care (including Primary Care Reimbursement Service PCRS) represent 45% of overall HSE expenditure.
It is predicted that demand for services such as home help care as well as residential and intermediate care in nursing homes could increase by up to 60% in the years to 2030 due to the rise in population and the increase in an aging population.
(ESRI projections)
The operational financial outturn for 2017 as reported in the financial statements shows a Revenue Income and Expenditure deficit of €129.6m, which includes the receipt of €208.3m of once-off revenue funding which was provided by way of a supplementary estimate for 2017.
The letter of determination received on the 29th December indicated that of the funding received €75m was available for central pay awards, €50m for State Claims Agency, €47.7m in relation to a shortfall on acute income and €35.6m was also made available for the winter access programme.
Including the impact of the “first charge”, the overall result for 2017 is a deficit for health of €139.9m, which is noted below and illustrated in table 4.
Under the Health Service Executive (Financial Matters) Act, 2014 the financial control mechanism known as “first charge” was introduced for the HSE and the first period to which this related was the 2016 financial year.
Acute Hospitals Services Acute services include emergency care, urgent care, short term stabilisation, scheduled care, trauma, acute surgery, critical care and pre-hospital care for adults and children.
Hospitals continually work to improve access to scheduled and unscheduled care, ensuring quality and patient safety within the allocated budget.
The seven Hospital Groups provide the structure to deliver an integrated hospital network of acute care in each geographic area.
There is an overriding requirement for the HSE to maximise the provision of essential and safe services within the totality of the funding available.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
The final outturn for Acute Hospital Services in 2017 was €5,919m, which included deficit of €139.7m.
The constituent elements of this deficit are as follows; €23m related to bad debt provision, €69m related to the cost of operational services, this was substantially in clinical non-pay which had a €44m adverse position.
In addition, there was a €20m shortfall on hospital private maintenance charges.
This was after the application of once off funding of €42m to this category by way of Supplementary Estimate.
Activity delivery in many areas was higher than the targets set out in NSP 2017, in terms of both activity volume and overall complexity.
The adverse variance experienced in clinical costs of €44m is a direct reflection of this enhanced level of service delivery.
Financial Governance Disability and Older Persons Services
Mental Health Services The challenge in 2017 for the Disability and Older Persons Services was to meet the rising demand for services as a result of an aging population, longer life expectancy, coupled with changing needs and an increasing number of people with a disability with more complex service requirements. The final outturn for the Social Care Services in 2017 was €3,072m, which included a deficit of €24.5m.
The final outturn for Mental Health Services in 2017 was €842m, which included a surplus of €0.3m.
This surplus was delivered as cost pressures in the areas of staffing and the increasing costs of private placements were balanced substantially by savings arising from the difficulty and timing around hiring new and replacement posts.
In relation to service delivery there were a number of developments progressed in 2017, these include;
Each year, the population aged 65 years and over increases by almost 20,000 people, and by over 2,500 for those aged 85 years and over.
This presents a particular challenge for serving a growing and ageing population.
To that end and with cognisance to funding levels a wide range of older person’s services are provided which include home supports, short stay and long stay residential care (Nursing Homes Support Scheme).
In addition to the above both transitional care and day care services are provided where specific pressures exist.
This ensures that appropriate care pathways are in place so services can be delivered at adequate levels, in an integrated manner to meet the needs of older people.
Older Persons Services reported a surplus of €2.6m for 2017.
Nursing Homes Support Scheme (NHSS) The number of persons funded under the NHSS at the end of December 2017 was 22,949 which represented an average of 22,983 people in long terms residential care for 2017.
At the end of December, the waiting time for an NHSS place was on target at four weeks with 537 people on the waiting list.
A surplus of €1.2m was reported against this scheme at the end of 2017.
Disability Services
Disability Services reported a deficit of €28.3m at the year-end based.
This deficit relates principally to the costs of providing residential care to people with an intellectual disability including the provision of emergency placements.
Emergency placements continued to be a significant service pressure in disability services in 2017.
This is in an environment where individual placements can cost up to €0.5m.
The cost is dependent ultimately on the clients need and the complexity of each individual case presenting.
Another driver of the 2017 overspend was the expenditure associated with HIQA compliance, the implementation of quality improvements and action plans arising from HIQA inspection reports.
• The development of three new Child & Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHs) teams.
The development of one new Psychiatry of Later Life (POLL) team.
The opening of the Deer Lodge Special Care Unit.
€3m of investment in service infrastructure.
The advancement of the new National Forensic Services capital project.
Mental Health Engagement Leads appointed in all CHOs.
Launches of the National Recovery Framework, QSUS Best Practice Guidance, local CFL Suicide Prevention Plans, Perinatal MH Model of Care and the Youth Mental Health Taskforce Report.
Notwithstanding the above developments MH also have a number of challenges, namely a high level of agency & overtime due to reduced ability to recruit staff into available posts, and an increasing level of high cost capitation payments relating to residential placements with private providers.
The level of Capitation expenditure is also growing year on year due to the increasing complexity of patients, along with the inability of services to cater for high need clients due to staff shortages and unfilled posts.
Primary Care Services
The final outturn for the Primary Care Services in 2017 was €3,809m including the Primary Care Reimbursement Service.
Core operational services within Primary Care, Social Inclusion and Palliative Care reported a surplus of €6.5m at the end of 2017, largely attributable to once off time related savings, relating mainly to chronic disease clinical posts and palliative care beds not coming on stream as anticipated.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Financial Governance
The Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS) reported a balanced financial position for 2017.
The PCRS budget for 2017 was framed by reference to a series of working assumptions which had been developed in detailed discussions with the DOH.
Expenditure was the subject of close monitoring and assessment from the beginning of the year with the main expenditure drivers being Community Drug Schemes and High Tech Medicines.
Health & Wellbeing Services (H&WB) The final outturn for the Health & Wellbeing Services in 2017 was €209m, which included a surplus of €2.8m.
The underspend is reflective of difficulties in recruiting clinical staff such as public health doctors and radiographers.
A wide range of services were provided in H&WB in 2017 which ranged from environmental health services, water fluoridation, public health, health surveillance and protection and the nationally led vaccination programmes (Rotavirus, Men-B, Flu and HPV).
These services were provided in addition to the services offered by office of tobacco control, crisis pregnancy agency and the national screening service.
Financially-Related Initiatives
Finance Reform
Improvement of the HSE’s outdated financial and procurement systems is a strategic priority which is supported by the Finance Reform Programme.
Further significant progress was made, during 2017, in securing the necessary approvals to invest in an Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS).
The contract was signed in June 2017 for a software platform.
Planning the design and implementation of the single national finance and procurement system will progress in 2018.
Within this over-arching Value Improvement Programme we will focus on three broad priority themes: •
Improving value within existing services;
Improving value within non-direct service areas; and
Strategic value improvement.
While there are a number of opportunities to secure improved value that are within the remit and role of the HSE to deliver, there are others that will require wider consideration of policy, legislation and regulatory issues and therefore will benefit from the involvement and support of the Department of Health and other stakeholders.
Through the Value Improvement Programme, we will target improvement opportunities to address the overall financial challenge while maintaining levels of activity.
The Programme, will seek to improve services while also seeking to mitigate the operational financial challenge in services for 2018.
This should only be delivered via realistic and achievable measures that do not adversely impact services.
The implementation of the Slaintecare Report is a key focus area for 2018 and future years, as well as for the attainment of the goals enshrined in the framework which is set out by the HSE’s Corporate Plan for 2015-2017.
Attainment of the goals will require a focus upon: •
Improving the quality, safety and value of the services we deliver
Prioritising the design and implementation of integrated models of care
Reviewing operational capacity in order to support quality and access for emergency and planned acute care
Progress to the next stage of implementation of the Health Services People Strategy 2015-2018, building on progress to date.
Improvements to ICT, data governance and information governance
Implementation of the CHO and HG Structures
Improvements in financial controls and probity
Implementation of the Finance Reform programme
Addressing the challenges posed by the investment backlog in essential medical equipment and estates infrastructure.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
The Act requires the Committee to meet at least four times in each year and to report in writing, at least once in every year, to the Director General and to the Directorate, on the matters upon which it has advised and on the Committee’s activities during the year.
A copy of this report is to be provided to the Minister.
In accordance with good governance practice, the Audit Committee has in place a Charter which sets out in detail the role, advisory duties and authority of the Committee, along with certain administrative matters.
During 2017, the Committee’s Charter was reviewed in light of the publication by DPER of a revised Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies 2016 which came into effect on the 1st September 2016.
The Audit Committee Charter recognises the establishment by the HSE of a separate Risk Committee, reporting to the Directorate, which is responsible for advising the Directorate on matters relating to all risks principally of a non-financial nature.
The focus of the Audit Committee, in providing its advice to the Directorate and the Director General, is on oversight of and advice on: (i) the HSE’s financial reporting; and (ii) the HSE’s systems of internal financial control and financial risk management.
The Audit Committee also plays a role in promoting good accounting practice, improved and more informed financial decision-making and safeguarding the HSE’s assets and resources through a focus on improving regularity, propriety and value for money throughout the HSE.
Section 33B of the Health Act 2004 as amended by section 11 of the Health Service Executive (Financial Matters) Act 2014.
Section 34A of the Health Act 2004 as amended by section 12 of the Health Service Executive (Financial Matters) Act 2014.
The publication of the eHealth Strategy for Ireland in late 2013 identified the critical role of eHealth in enabling fundamental reforms of the health service.
The steps taken up to now have enabled the HSE to begin to create a structure that allows eHealth to truly become a catalyst for the reform of health care in Ireland.
The purpose of the eHealth Committee is to support and guide implementation of the eHealth Strategy for Ireland through the implementation of the HSE Knowledge and Information Plan published in March 2015.
The Committee focuses principally on ensuring the provision of expert knowledge, guidance and networking opportunities to the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) to aid delivery of its work programme.
Four meetings were held in 2017: •
22nd March – Overview of the Electronic Health Record (EHR) Business Case and EHR Governance.
20th September – Key themes for review and discussion were Medication Safety, Medical Laboratory Imaging System (MedLis), Medication Reconciliations
5th December – Key themes for review and discussion were EHR and Primary Care.
The MN CMS was presented on and the Digital Maturity Assessment plan was discussed. The eHealth Ireland committee will review its chair and membership every two years.
In 2017 a patient representative body was appointed to the committee.
The eHealth Ireland Committee publishes its minutes, agendas, and content to the eHealth Ireland web site to build towards an agreed transparency agenda around this area.
Disclosures Required by Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (2016)
The Directorate is responsible for ensuring that the HSE has complied with the requirements of the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies (‘the Code’), as published by DPER in August 2016.
• Legal Costs and Settlements
Consultancy Costs
Travel and Subsistence – Domestic and International
Hospitality Expenditure.
These additional financial disclosures will be implemented in the 2018 annual financial statements.
This is to allow the necessary amendments, revisions and updates to the current multiple varying financial systems/processes and input forms across the HSE that feed into the production of the annual financial statements data.
Signed on behalf of the HSE
As the Committee works in the early years with the CIO to develop strategies, approaches, priorities and evaluates investments, it expects to meet between three and six times annually.
The eHealth Ireland Committee is supported by a secretariat provided through the OCIO.
The system of internal control is designed to manage and reduce risk rather than to eliminate risk and as such the system of internal control is designed to provide reasonable but not absolute assurance that assets are safeguarded, transactions are authorised and properly recorded and that material errors or irregularities are either prevented or detected in a timely manner.
The system of internal control, which accords with guidance issued by the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, has been in place in the HSE for the year ended 31 December 2017 and up to the date of approval of the financial statements except for the control issues outlined below.
3. Capacity to Handle Risk
The Directorate, as governing body of the HSE, has overall responsibility for the system of internal financial control and risk management.
The Directorate may establish committees to provide assistance and advice in relation to the performance of its duties and functions.
The Health Service Executive (Governance) Act 2013 (2013 Act) provides for the establishment of an Audit Committee and any other Committees that the Directorate deem as necessary for the purpose of providing assistance and advice in relation to the performance of the Directorates functions.
The HSE has an Audit Committee* which was established in January 2014 in accordance with the provisions of the 2013 Act.
The membership of the Audit Committee who all have financial and audit expertise, consists of an external Chairperson, four other external members and a member of the HSE Directorate.
The Audit Committee acts in an advisory capacity and has no executive function.
The focus of the Audit Committee in providing advice to the Directorate and the Director General, is on the regularity and propriety of transactions recorded in the accounts and on the effectiveness of the system of internal financial control operated by the HSE.
The Audit Committee operates under an agreed Charter which sets out in detail the role, duties and authority of the Committee.
The Audit Committee is required to meet at least 4 times annually.
In 2017 the Audit Committee met on 7 separate occasions and a joint meeting of the Audit and Risk Committee’s took place on one further occasion.
The HSE has also established an Internal Audit Division with appropriately trained personnel which operates in accordance with a written charter approved by the Directorate.
The National Director of Internal Audit reports to the Audit Committee and to the Director General of the HSE and is a member of the HSE Leadership team.
The work programme of Internal Audit is agreed with the Audit Committee.
During 2017 the Internal Audit Division completed a substantial body of work and issued 158 audit reports.
Particular focus was placed on auditing funded agencies and ICT audits.
A Risk Committee* was established in 2014 in accordance with the provisions of the Health Service Executive (Governance) Act, 2013.
The Risk Committee, which reports to the Directorate, has an independent chair and comprises a member of the Directorate and four external members.
The Committee operates under agreed Terms of Reference and focuses principally on assisting the Directorate in fulfilling its duties by providing an independent and objective review of non-financial risks.
The Committee kept its terms of reference and work programme under review during the year.
In 2017 the Risk Committee met on 6 separate occasions.
Liaison between the Audit and Risk Committees are facilitated by an annual joint meeting of the two committees and regular engagement between the two Committee Chairs.
Please see Directorate Members Report for additional information regarding these Committees.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Financial Governance
The HSE has developed a risk management policy which clearly defines the roles and responsibilities for all levels of staff in relation to risk, (financial and nonfinancial).
The policy has been updated during 2017 and communicated across all levels of staff.
The HSE is committed to ensuring that risk management is seen as the concern of everyone and is embedded both as part of normal day to day business and informs the strategic and operational planning and performance cycle.
Management at all levels of the HSE are responsible to the Director General for the implementation and maintenance of appropriate and effective internal control in respect of their respective functions and organisations.
This embedding of responsibility for the system of internal control is designed to ensure not only that the HSE is capable of detecting and responding to control issues should they arise, with appropriate escalation protocols, but also that a culture of accountability and responsibility pertains throughout the whole organisation.
has been delegated to the State Claims Agency (SCA) under statute.
The SCA provides specialist advice and risk management to the HSE which is supported by the electronic national incident management reporting system NIMS.
The HSE has in place an internal control framework which is continuously monitored to ensure that there is an effective culture of internal control.
The HSE’s Code of Governance is set out on www.hse.ie and includes the following: •
The Code of Governance reflects the current behavioural standards, policies and procedures to be applied within and by the HSE and the agencies it funds to provide services on its behalf.
The introduction of the accountability framework describes in detail the means by which managers in the health service, including those in Community Healthcare Organisations (CHOs) and Hospital Groups (HG) will be held to account for performance in relation to service provision, quality and patient safety, finance and workforce.
There is a framework of administrative procedures in place including segregation of duties, a system of delegation and accountability, a system for the authorisation of expenditure and regular management reporting.
The HSE’s National Financial Regulations form an integral part of the system of internal control and have been designed to be consistent with statutory requirements and to also ensure compliance with public sector guidelines issued by the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform.
The HSE has in place a devolved annual budgetary system and each year the Minister for Health formally approves the annual service plan.
Defined accountability limits are set which are closely monitored by the National Performance Oversight Group (NPOG) on behalf of the Director General.
The HSE has in place a wide range of written policies, procedures, protocols and guidelines in relation to operational and financial controls.
The HSE’s risk management policy involves proactively identifying risks that threaten the achievement of objectives and putting in place actions to reduce these to an acceptable level.
The policy sets out the risk management processes in place and details the roles and responsibilities of staff in relation to risk.
Risk Management is the responsibility of all managers at all levels within the HSE.
Risk registers are in place at key levels in the organisation.
These identify the key risks facing the HSE.
Risks on these registers have been assessed and evaluated according to their significance.
At an organisational level the Corporate Risk Register is subject to monitoring and updating on a quarterly basis.
The risk registers set out the existing controls, the risk rating, any additional controls required to mitigate each risk and assigns both persons and timescales for completion of these.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Additionally an annual Controls Assurance Statement (CAS) must be completed by all senior management.
This statement requires management to confirm that they are aware of and comply with the key financial controls and code of governance in place within the HSE. Financial Governance
5. Ongoing Monitoring and Review
Formal procedures have been established for monitoring control processes and control deficiencies are communicated to those responsible for taking corrective action and to the Directorate and Senior Management.
I confirm that the following ongoing monitoring systems are in place: •
Key risks and related controls have been identified and processes have been put in place to monitor the operation of those key controls and report any identified deficiencies.
Reporting arrangements have been established at all levels where responsibility for financial management has been assigned
There are regular reviews by senior management of periodic and annual performance and financial reports indicating HSE performance against budgets/forecasts
There are regular reviews by the Department of Health (DOH) of the HSE’s performance in terms of budget and service plans.
The National Performance Oversight Group (NPOG) has delegated authority from the Director General to serve as a key performance and accountability oversight and scrutiny process for the HSE and to support the Director General and the Directorate in overseeing and driving the performance of the HSE’s Divisions.
In addition to internal monitoring the HSE also has regular meetings with the DOH to jointly review performance.
Key service and financial performance is reviewed with the Department of the Taoiseach and the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform (DPER) via a monthly Senior Officials Group (SOG) and also Cabinet Committee on Health (CCOH).
The work of Internal Audit forms an important part of the monitoring of the internal control system within the HSE.
The annual work plan of Internal Audit is informed by analysis of the key risks to which the HSE is exposed and is approved by the Audit Committee.
The National Director of Internal Audit attends all Audit Committee meetings and has regular one to one meetings with the Chairperson of the Audit Committee as well as the Director General.
Monitoring and review of the effectiveness of the HSE’s internal controls is also informed by the work of the Comptroller and Auditor General.
Comments and recommendations made by the Comptroller and Auditor General in his management letters, audit certs or annual reports are reviewed by the Directorate and Leadership Team and actions are taken to implement recommendations.
Review of their implementation is monitored by NPOG, on behalf of the Directorate, with input from the Audit Committee.
In addition a National Financial Controls Assurance Group (NFCAG) was also established in 2015 in order to address a number of recurring control weaknesses identified as part of the annual audit of the financial statements and by internal audit and other external reviews.
Since 2015 this group has focused on addressing issues in relation to procurement, taxation, prompt payment interest, pay-related overpayments and cash handling.
This group reports to NPOG.
Annually the HSE requires all relevant senior staff at Grade VIII (or equivalent) and above to complete an internal control questionnaire which is designed to provide essential feedback in respect of key control areas.
This allows the HSE to monitor the effectiveness of key controls and to direct remediation activity where required.
The HSE has procedures in place to ensure compliance with current procurement rules and guidelines.
Matters arising regarding controls over procurement are highlighted under the heading internal control issues.
Procurement
In procuring goods and services, all areas within the HSE must comply with the relevant procurement procedures which are set out in detail in the HSE’s National Financial Regulations.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Financial Governance
Currently there are central contracts in place covering annual expenditure of €1.1bn which is up €454m or 72% on the value of contracts registered as at the end of 2016.
Key components of this Sourcing plan relate to: •
On-going development of the Procurement Project management system (PPMS) which will support HSE staff with progressing procurement.
Continuing development of the Pricing & Assisted Sourcing System (PASS) which will continue to assist HSE staff by improving access and visibility of current contracts.
HBS Procurement has developed the Data Warehouse System to provide visibility of product data and usage including price comparison across legacy systems.
Note 10 The Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act 2006
The Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act 2006 established a statutory scheme to address insurance difficulties experienced by persons infected with Hepatitis C and HIV through the administration within the State of blood and blood products.
This scheme addresses the problems faced by these persons due to their inability to purchase mortgage protection and life assurance policies as a result of contaminated blood products being administered to them.
Medical, Dental and Surgical Supplies
Laboratory Supplies
Pharmacy Supplies
High Tech Pharmacy Inventories
Pharmacy Dispensing Inventories
Household Services
Stationery and Office Supplies
Blood and Blood Products
Sundries
Note 17 Trade and Other Receivables 104,512
Receivables: Patient Debtors – Public Inpatient Charges
Receivables: Patient Debtors – Long Stay Charges
Prepayments and Accrued Income
Department of Health (DoH)
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Payroll Technical Adjustment
Pension Levy Deductions from Staff/Service Providers
Statutory Redundancy Claim
Active Retirement Ireland
Adapt Community Drugs Team
Aftercare Recovery Group
Age Action Ireland
Age and Opportunity
AIDS Fund Housing Project (Centenary House)
AIDS Help West
All About Healthcare T/A The Care Team
All Ireland Institute of Hospice & Palliative Care (AIIHPC)
Alpha One Foundation
ANEW Support Service
1,442 839 Name of Agency
Abode Hostel and Day Centre
Acquired Brain Injury Ireland (Formerly Peter Bradley Foundation)
Aiseanna Tacaiochta
Aiseiri
Aislinn Centre, Kilkenny
Alzheimer Society of Ireland
Ana Liffey Drug Project
Anchor Treatment Centre
ARC Cancer Support Centre
Arthritis Ireland
Asperger Syndrome Association of Ireland (ASPIRE)
Associated Charities Trust
Association for the Healing of Institutional Abuse (AHIA) (Previously known as the Aislinn Centre, Dublin)
Asthma Society of Ireland
Ballyfermot Chapelizod Partnership
Ballyfermot Local Drug and Alcohol Task Force CLG
Ballymun Local Drugs Task Force
Ballymun Regional Youth Resource (BYRY)
Ballymun Youth Action Project (YAP)
Ballyphehane and Togher Community Resource Centre
Barretstown Camp
Ard Aoibhinn Centre
Ardee Day Care Centre Arklow South Wicklow Home Help Service Arlington Novas Ireland
Association of Parents and Friends of The Mentally Handicapped
Autism Initiatives Group Ballyfermot Home Help
Be Independent Home Care
Beaufort Day Care Centre
Blanchardstown Local Drugs Task Force
Blanchardstown Youth Service
Bloomfield Health Services
Bodywhys The Eating Disorder Association of Ireland
Bon Secours Sisters
Bray Community Addiction Team
Bray Travellers Group
Brindley Healthcare
Cabra Resource Centre
Cairdeas Centre Carlow
Caredoc GP Co-operative
Caremark Ireland
Bluebird Care
Brothers of Charity Services Ireland
Camphill Communities of Ireland
Cancer Care West Cappagh National Orthopaedic Hospital Capuchins
Caritas Convalescent Home
Carlow Regional Youth Service
Carlow/Kilkenny Home Care Team
Carnew Community Care Centre
Carrigoran Nursing Home – Day Care Centre
Castle Homecare
Catholic Institute for Deaf People (CIDP)
Centres for Independent Living (CIL)
Cheshire Ireland
Childrens Sunshine Home
ChildVision (St Joseph’s School For The Visually Impaired)
Chrysalis Community Drug Project
Cill Dara Ar Aghaid
Clannad Care
Clarecastle Daycare Centre
Clareville Court Day Centre
Clondalkin Addiction Support Programme (CASP)
Clondalkin Drugs Task Force
Clonmany Mental Health Association
125 Charleville Care Project Ltd
Clare Accessible Transport (T/a Clare Bus) Clarecare Ltd Incorporating Clare Social Service Council
CLASP (Community of Lough Arrow Social Project)
CLUB 91 (Formerly Chez Nous Service), Sligo
Grants HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Financial Governance
Community Games
Community Response, Dublin
Community Substance Misuse Team Limerick
Cobh General Hospital
Community Nursing Unit NW
Coombe Women’s Hospital
COPE Foundation
COPE Galway
Cork Association for Autism
Cork Foyer Project
County Sligo Leader Partnership Company
County Wexford Community Workshop, Enniscorthy/ New Ross Ltd
Cystic Fibrosis Registry of Ireland
Daisyhouse Housing Association 48 48 192 1,875 1,875 1,816
Cork Mental Health Association Cork Social and Health Education Project (CSHEP)
CROI (West of Ireland Cardiology Foundation)
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Delta Centre Carlow
Diabetes Federation of Ireland
Donnycarney Youth Project Ltd
Donnycarney/Beaumont Local Care
Donore Community Development
Down Syndrome Ireland
Drogheda Community Services
Drogheda Homeless Aid Association
Dromcollogher and District Respite Care Centre
Drumkeerin Care Of The Elderly
Drumlin House
Dublin 12 Local Drug and Alcohol Task Force CLG
Dublin AIDS Alliance (DAA) Ltd
Dublin City University
Dublin North East Drugs Task Force
Dublin Region Homeless Executive
Dun Laoghaire Home Help
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Community Addiction Team
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Local Drugs Task Force
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown Outreach Project
Darndale Belcamp Drug Awareness
Daughters of Charity
Disability Federation of Ireland (DFI)
Dublin Dental Hospital
East London NHS Edward Worth Library
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Environmental Protection Agency
Epilepsy Ireland
Errigal Truagh Special Needs Parents and Friends Ltd
Ferns Diocesan Youth Services (FDYS)
Festina Lente Foundation
Fettercairn Drug Rehabilitation Project
Finglas Addiction Support Team
Finglas Cabra Local Drugs and Alcohol Task Force
Friedreich’s Ataxia Society in Ireland
FRS Homecare
Gaelic Athletic Association
Graiguenamanagh Elderly Association
Greater Blanchardstown Response to Drugs
Guardian Ad Litem and Rehabilitation Office (GALRO)
Hail Housing Association for Integrated Living
Headway the National Association for Acquired Brain Injury
Hesed House
Holy Angels Carlow, Special Needs Day Care Centre
Holy Family School
Hope House
Immigrant Counselling and Psychotherapy (ICAP)
Inchicore Community Drugs Team
Iontas Arts & Community Resource Centre
Irish Advocacy Network
Irish Association for Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus (IASBH)
Irish College of General Practitioners
Irish Guide Dogs for the Blind
Irish Haemophilia Society (IHS)
Homecare Independent Living Ltd
Irish Hospice Foundation
Irish Kidney Association (IKA)
Irish Motor Neurone Disease Association
Irish Prison Service
Jack and Jill Childrens Foundation
Jigsaw (also known as Headstrong)
Kilbarrack Coast Community Programme Ltd (KCCP)
Kildare and West Wicklow Community Addiction Team Ltd
Kildare Youth Services (KYS)
Killinarden (KARP)
Kilmaley Voluntary Housing Association
Kingsriver Community
Leitrim Association of People with Disabilities (LAPWD)
Leitrim Development Company
Name of Agency
Irish Heart Foundation
Irish Society for Autism
Irish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (ISPCC)
Jobstown Assisting Drug Dependency Project (JAAD Project) K Doc (GP Out of Hours Service)
Limerick Social Services Council
Limerick Youth Service Community Training Centre
Liscarne Court Senior Citizens
Little Angels Hostel Letterkenny
Longford Community Resources Ltd
Longford Social Services Committee
Lourdes Day Care Centre
Macroom Senior Citizens Housing Development Sullane Haven Ltd
Mahon Community Creche
Marian Court Welfare Home Clonmel
McGann Family Home Care Services
Meath Local Sports Partnership
Meath Partnership
Mental Health Associations (MHAs)
Lotamore Family Centre
Mid-West Regional Drugs Task Force
Migraine Association of Ireland
Mount Cara House
Mounttown Neighbourhood Youth Project
Revenue Grants HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
National Association of Housing for the Visually Impaired Ltd
National Childhood Network (NCN)
Muscular Dystrophy Ireland
Nasc (The Irish Immigrant Support Centre)
National Council for the Blind of Ireland (NCBI) National Federation of Voluntary Bodies in Ireland National Maternity Hospital National Office of Victims of Abuse (NOVA) National Paediatric Hospital National Rehabilitation Hospital
National Suicide Research Foundation (NSRF)
National University of Ireland, Galway (NUIG)
National Youth Council of Ireland
Nazareth House, Mallow
Nazareth House, Sligo
New Ross Community Hospital
Newport Social Services, Day Care Centre
North Tipperary Disability Support Services Ltd
North Tipperary Leader Partnership
North West Alcohol Forum
North West Regional Drugs Task Force
Northside Community Health Initiative (NICHE)
Northside Partnership
Northstar Family Support Project
Northwest Hospice
Nua Healthcare Services
Nurse on Call – Homecare Package
North West Parents and Friends Association
Offaly Travellers Movement
Open Door Day Centre
Order of Malta
Ossory Youth Services
Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Crumlin Our Lady’s Hospice & Care Services (Sisters of Charity)
Parkinson’s Association of Ireland
PHC Care Management Ltd
Pieta House
Post Polio Support Group (PPSG)
Prague House
Housing Association
Rialto Community Development
Rialto Community Drugs Team
2016 €000 Rialto Partnership Company
Right of Place Second Chance Group
Ringsend and District Response to Drugs
Roscommon Home Services Co-op
Roscommon Support Group Ltd
Rosedale Residential Home
Rotunda Hospital
Royal College of Physicians
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland
Royal Hospital Donnybrook
Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital
Ruhama Women’s Project
Safetynet Primary Care
Sandymount Home Help
SAOL Project
Schizophrenia Ireland Lucia Foundation
SDC South Dublin County Partnership (formerly Dodder Valley Partnership)
Shalamar Finiskilin Housing Association
Shankhill Old Folks Association
Shannondoc Ltd (GP Out Of Hours Service)
Simon Communities of Ireland
Sisters of Charity
Sisters of Charity St Marys Centre for the Blind and Visually Impaired
Grants** 2017 €000
Slí Eile Support Services Ltd
Sligo Family Centre
Sligo Social Services Council Ltd
Sligo Sport and Recreation Partnership Snug Community Counselling
Society of St Vincent De Paul (SVDP)
South Dublin Senior Citizens Club
South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital
South West Counselling Centre
South West Mayo Development Company
Southern Gay Health Project
Southside Partnership
Spinal Injuries Ireland
Spiritan Asylum Services Initiative (SPIRASI)
St Aengus Community Action Group
St Andrew’s Resource Centre
St Bridgets Day Care Centre
St Carthage’s House Lismore
St Cronan’s Association
St Dominic’s Community Response Project
St Fiacc’s House, Graiguecullen
St Gabriel’s School and Centre
St Hilda’s Services For The Mentally Handicapped, Athlone
St John’s Hospital
St Joseph’s Foundation
St Joseph’s Home For The Elderly
St Kevin’s Home Help Service
St Laurence O’ Toole SSC
St Lazarians House, Bagenalstown
St Luke’s Home
St Mary’s School For The Deaf
St Michael’s Hospital, Dun Laoghaire
St Michael’s House
St Michael’s Day Care Centre
St Monica’s Community Development Committee
St Monica’s Nursing Home
St Patrick’s Centre, Kilkenny (Sisters of Charity) St Patrick’s Special School
St Vincent’s University Hospital, Elm Park
Star Project Ballymun Ltd
Stella Maris Facility
Stillorgan Home Help
Tabor House, Navan
Tabor Lodge
Talbot Grove Treatment Centre
Sunbeam House Services
Tallaght Home Help
Tallaght Hospital
Tallaght Rehabilitation Project
Tallaght Travellers Youth Service
Teach Mhuire Day Care Centre
Tearmann Eanna Teo
The Avalon Centre, Sligo
The Beeches Residential Home
The Birches Alzheimer Day Centre
The Edmund Rice International Heritage Centre
The Irish Men’s Sheds Association (IMSA)
The Killarney Asylum Seekers Initiative (KASI)
The Nightingale Placement Agency (TNPA)
The Oasis Centre
The Sexual Health Centre
Third Age
Threshold National Housing Organisation
Thurles Community Social Services
Tipperary Association for Special Needs
Tipperary Hospice Movement
Tolka River Project
Tralee Womens Forum
Transgender Equality Network Ireland
Trinity College Dublin
Tullow Day Care Centre
Turners Cross Social Services Ltd
The Eating Disorder Clinic Cork
University College Dublin
University of Limerick
Valentia Community Hospital
Village Counselling Service
Walkinstown Greenhills Resource Centre
Wallaroo Pre-School
Waterford and South Tipperary Community Youth Service
Waterford Association for the Mentally Handicapped
Waterford Community Childcare
Waterford Hospice Movement
Well Woman Clinics
West Cork Carers Support Group Ltd
West Limerick Resources Ltd
West Of Ireland Alzheimer Foundation
Westdoc (GP Out Of Hours Service)
Western Region Drugs Task Force
Western Traveller and Intercultural Development Association
Westmeath Community Development Ltd
Wexford Homecare Service
Windmill Therapeutic Training Unit
Total Grants to Outside Agencies (see Note 8 for Revenue; see Note 13 for Capital)
* Additional payments, not shown above, may have been made to some agencies related to services provided.
** Agencies with grants exceeding €100,000 in either year are shown.
All other grants are included at “Total Grants under €100,000”.
Accordingly, the 2016 comparatives above have been re-stated where appropriate.
HSE Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 193
Dr. Steevens’ Hospital
Department of Health
Statement of Strategy 2016 – 2019
Foreword by the Minister
The Government wants to use the benefits of a strong economy to deliver a fair society.
This means investing in rebuilding and reforming key public services, like health – the services that people depend on and want to see supported.
Our longterm vision is to allow everyone to enjoy physical and mental health and wellbeing to their full potential.
This Statement of Strategy for the Department of Health sets out a range of actions to pursue that agenda over the period 2016-2019.
These actions are organised under five major strategic objectives.
The Statement reflects the health commitments in the Programme for a Partnership Government.
This Strategy has also been informed by changing healthcare needs.
We have an ageing population.
People are living longer which means their needs will become greater, more diverse and more complex.
We also have the highest birth rate in Europe.
These trends are very welcome for Irish society as a whole.
They also, however, generate increased demand for services.
We must recognise and address the problems patients face trying to access services whether from emergency departments or from waiting lists; the severe pressure on very dedicated staff; and increasing demand and pressure on resources.
Actions in this Strategy are aimed at addressing these challenges by improving health and wellbeing and supporting independent living, delivering high quality and safe care which is more responsive, integrated and person-centred, and better managing our health services.
I have been very clear on the need for a long-term vision for our health and social care services and the work of the Oireachtas Committee on the Future of Healthcare provides an opportunity for political, and indeed societal, consensus on our future direction.
While there are many challenges and difficulties to deal with, we must also acknowledge the many improvements that have been made and recognise those who work so hard across the whole health and social care sector.
For example, we have seen life expectancy in Ireland increase by two and a half years since 2004 to where it is now above the EU average.
We have seen mortality rates for circulatory system and respiratory diseases fall, an improvement in cancer care, and significant progress in reducing tobacco consumption.
We are lucky to have a committed and skilled staff in our health services.
I look forward to working with them, the Secretary General and staff of the Department, and Ministers of State McGrath, Corcoran Kennedy, Byrne and McEntee, as we continue to develop a high-performing Department to lead and oversee the sector and to deliver on our aims.
Introduction by the Secretary General This Statement of Strategy is submitted to the Minister for Health under Section 5(1) of the Public Service Management Act, 1997.
It sets out an ambitious range of actions to improve health outcomes and the health services over the life of this Strategy.
These actions will be reported on annually and we will be held accountable for the progress we deliver.
The Department has been undergoing a significant organisational change programme, Working Better Together, since 2015.
This will continue during this Strategy period to ensure we are as effective as possible in fulfilling our role and delivering on the ambitions in this Strategy.
The development of this Strategy Statement has been informed by consultations with the public, stakeholders, departmental agencies, other Government departments and our staff.
Thank you for your contributions to this consultation.
Thank you in particular to the staff of the Department for their ongoing commitment and readiness to embrace the full potential in our role to contribute to the achievement of a Healthy Ireland and improvement in our health services.
The Department of Health’s Mission, Role, Functions and Values Operating Environment – Opportunities and Challenges
(B) Strategic Objectives
Support people to lead healthy and independent lives
Ensure the delivery of high quality and safe health and social care
Create a more responsive, integrated and people-centred health and social care service
Promote effective and efficient management of the health services
Develop a high-performing Department to lead and oversee the health and social care sector
Appendix 1 – List of health-related Programme for Partnership Government commitments
Appendix 2 – Bodies under the Department’s aegis
Background and Context
This is the Statement of Strategy for the Department of Health for the period 2016-2019.
It describes the current environment in which health and social services are to be delivered and identifies a number of underlying themes that will inform our work over the three year period.
Finally, it outlines the actions we will take, organised into five Strategic Objectives.
This Statement of Strategy takes account of the Programme for a Partnership Government.
It also reflects the ongoing health reform programme and other broader Government strategies such as the Public Service Reform Plan, the Civil Service Renewal Plan and action plans on Jobs, Housing and Homelessness and Education.
It has been informed by a wide consultation process carried out during the development of this Strategy.
We have also set the development of our own staff and our own capability as a distinct strategic objective.
Through our major change programme, Working Better Together, we are working towards achieving a Department that is: focused on priority outcomes; evidence-informed; responsible and accountable; supportive of staff in giving their best and taking the initiative; committed to the learning, personal and career development of all staff; and open in sharing information relevant for others.
Ultimately, the vision of the change programme is a better environment in which to deliver our work, where on an on-going basis high performance is achieved, where collaborative working is promoted, and where we can all develop our knowledge and skills.
Implementing the programme is a key enabler for achieving our other strategic objectives and how we are doing this is set out under Strategic Objective 5.
Our Mission:
 keeping people healthy;
 providing the healthcare people need;
 delivering high quality services;
and  getting best value from health system resources.
Our Values :
A deep-rooted public service ethos of independence, integrity, impartiality, equality, fairness and respect
A culture of accountability, efficiency and value for money
The highest standards of professionalism, leadership and rigour
Operating Environment – Opportunities and Challenges
The Department operates in a highly complex environment, providing a leadership role for a very diverse and broad sector with a multiplicity of stakeholders.
Over the next three years this environment will be shaped by a number of factors including:
Economic: The last number of years have seen a sustained return of economic growth.
This recovery is providing the basis for renewed investment in vital public services, including health and social care.
While significant additional investment will be provided to the sector over 2016 and 2017, economic risks and fiscal constraints remain.
Continued economic growth in the coming years is projected which will allow for further improvements in public services.
However, EU Fiscal Rules will constrain the rate of growth in spending, requiring us to be as effective as possible in meeting existing and new population health demands.
Political: The Programme for a Partnership Government sets out an ambitious programme for all aspects of the health and social care sector spanning 139 individual commitments.
Its overarching priority is to increase access to safe, timely care, as close to people’s homes as possible.
The Programme also committed to the development by an All-Party Oireachtas Committee of a single long term vision for healthcare over a 10 year period with cross party consensus.
The Committee on the Future of Healthcare was established in June 2016 and is due to report in January 2017.
International: The UK’s decision to leave the EU will require the agreement of new arrangements for cross border sevices and cooperation in the area of health.
The Department will strive to ensure that Irish people’s interests are protected in negotiations to agree a new arrangement between the UK and the EU.
Ensuring that there is minimum disruption in the area of health and that essential services are maintained will be our key priority.
Demand Pressures: Health and social care services continue to face huge demographic pressures and a rising burden of chronic disease.
The overall population has been rising steadily in the last decade and is projected to increase by 4.9% by 2021.
Source: CSO – “Population and Labour
The population is also ageing (see Population Pyramid graph) – resulting in greater care requirements.
Projections suggest that between 2011 and 2021, the population aged 65 and over will increase by 38%, while the number of people aged over 85 years is currently increasing by approximately 3.3% each year.1 Coupled with these demographic pressures, the changing nature and complexity of care required is placing further pressures on the system.
An ageing population and lifesytle factors are contributing to a sharp increase in the prevalence of chronic disease with multiple morbidities.
Approximately 38% of Irish people over 50 years have one chronic disease and 11% have more than one.
Civil Service Renewal Plan: This provides a framework for renewing the Civil Service and enabling the building of capacity and improving the performance of the Civil Service and its staff.
Human Rights & Equality: The Department is conscious of its responsibility in ensuring that the principles of the Public Sector Duty in relation to human rights and equality are embedded across the work of the Department.
An example of this is the Department’s commitment to the creation of a more responsive, integrated and people-centred social care system which (amongst other things) supports the full and effective participation of people with disabilities in society on an equal basis with others, in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (see Independent Living section on page 7 under Objective 1).
Collaboration with other Departments and Public Sector Bodies: Continuing to develop strong working relationships with other Departments and Bodies, including agencies under the aegis of the Department (see Appendix 2), will be critical to achieving many of the Department’s and wider Government objectives.
National Risk Assessment: The National Risk Assessment published by Department of the Taoiseach identifies a number of risks with health implications, including economic risks, effects of Brexit, climate change and extreme weather events, food safety, increase in chronic disease, major pandemics, nuclear contamination, and anti-microbial resistance.
The Department also adheres to the four principles relating to Governance, Structures, Management and Reporting and the associated guidelines contained in the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform’s Risk Management Guidance for Government Departments (Feb 2016).
Official Languages Act: The Department is fully committed to facilitating people who wish to conduct their business with us through Irish.
In that context the Department is compliant with the Official Languages Act 2003 including the publication of this Statement of Strategy bilingually.
Further statistics on the health service and population health are at http://health.gov.ie/publications-research/statistics/
Strategic Objectives - Introduction
This Statement of Strategy has been prepared in accordance with the Public Service Management Act of 1997.
As such, it is not a strategy for the Health Service, but rather a corporate strategy statement focused on the work and activities of the Department of Health.
Nonetheless, the overall Mission of the Department, which was set out in our last Statement of Strategy and which remains valid for the three year period ahead, is to improve the health and wellbeing of people in Ireland by:    
keeping people healthy; providing the healthcare people need; delivering high quality services; and getting best value from health system resources.
In 2016, the Department prepared a paper entitled Better Health, Improving Health Care, which set out a strategic perspective for the incoming Minister for Health.
In addition, a significant number of actions have been assigned to the Department under the Programme for a Partnership Government.
A number of underlying themes in these documents have informed the development of this Statement of Strategy, including the following:
Changing Healthcare Needs: Life expectancy has improved significantly in Ireland in the past decade.
Between 2003 and 2014, life expectancy in Ireland for males increased from 75.7 years to 79.3 years and for females from 80.7 to 83.5 years (source: Eurostat).
This is a positive development which reflects, in part, improvements in healthcare.
When combined with the feed-through of changes in migration flows that took place in the 1960s, however, this change means that the number of older people in Ireland is increasing rapidly, with significant consequences for demand for healthcare and social care services.
In common with other advanced economies, Ireland is also experiencing a rise in the burden of chronic disease, i.e. conditions which are not acquired from someone else, and which are of long duration.
Approximately 38% of Irish people over 50 years have one chronic disease, and 11% have more than one.
Chronic disease accounts for 80% of all GP visits, 40% of hospital admissions, and 75% of hospital bed days.
As the number of older people increases, the number of people with chronic disease will increase, and the numbers with more than one chronic disease will pose a particular challenge to the existing model of care.
Requiring a new Model of Care: This changing pattern of need poses a particular challenge to our model of care.
Historically, health services in Ireland have evolved from a system which has been fragmented, overly hospital-centric, and focused on delivering episodes of care.
The ongoing challenge is to develop a model of care which is more integrated and continuous, person-centred, and delivered at the lowest level of complexity consistent with patient safety.
The Programme for a Partnership Government commits to a decisive shift towards Primary Care in the delivery of health services in Ireland, which may be seen as a core component in the development of a more integrated health service.
Primary care must be developed, and should have an explicit coordination and case management role, while on-going change and reform in other parts of the health service will also be required to develop a more integrated, person-centred service.
Deepening our understanding of how the model of care needs to change is an essential component in assessing the requirement for on-going investment in the health service, since additional capacity cannot substitute for improvements in the way care is delivered to people if we are to meet growing demand in the most affordable way possible.
In the early part of this strategy period, the Department will undertake a number of projects which focus on specifying the preferred model of care in Ireland across a number of service settings.
5 Combining short-term action with long-term focus: A large component of the Department’s work will continue to be related to the immediate challenges in the health services.
These include improving Patient Experience Times (PET) in emergency departments and addressing the challenge of waiting lists.
At the same time, achieving sustained and sustainable progress in addressing service needs depends on the achievement of broader reform over the medium and long-term.
This includes population health measures under the umbrella of Healthy Ireland, changing the underlying model of care, and delivering on reforms to the management structure of the health service.
In the case of the latter, reform has to be delivered in a manner which is consistent with the on-going delivery of services.
In terms of longer term vision, the Oireachtas has established the all-party Oireachtas Committee on the Future of Healthcare which is expected to complete its work early in 2017 and to provide further direction in relation to overall health and social care policy.
Performance and Accountability: A key theme of the Statement of Strategy is the need to maintain and enhance oversight of the service-delivery system, and in particular the implementation of the new Performance and Accountability Framework for the Health Service Executive (HSE).
This is one of a number of developments in the structure of operational supports for the health service which the Department is supporting.
Over time, the Department is seeking to develop a population-based framework for the formulation and implementation of evidence-informed policy and the planning, organisation and evaluation of health services.
This requires greater focus by planners, providers and the health workforce on population health needs as well as responsiveness to changes in such needs.
The 5 strategic objectives outlined below (table 1) are informed by these themes, and are aimed both at continuing the existing reform process, and on the implementation of the Programme for a Partnership Government.
It is important to note that to one extent or another, these objectives are inter-related and inter-dependent.
While many initiatives are already policy priorities, there is now a need for deeper and more systemic change and implementation within our system.
As this Statement of Strategy addresses a period of three years, there is a need for consideration of Departmental priorities for each year of the Strategy.
It is intended that this will be facilitated through a new Annual Departmental Statement of Priorities.
The Statement of Priorities will be an output of the annual business planning process and will list the Department’s priority outputs to be delivered during the year, including timelines for delivery.
Table 1:
5 Strategic Objectives:
Clinical Effectiveness
Ensuring safe, high quality care services requires the Department to consider the most appropriate evidence-based decision making processes for policy that can promote the achievement of best possible health outcomes for a given level of investment.
To this end, the work of the National Clinical Effectiveness Committee (NCEC) in recent years has developed a structured, systematic approach to the prioritisation, development and quality assurance of national clinical guidelines.
This work encompasses decision-making frameworks around systematic evidence reviews, budget impact analysis and strategies to consider both feasibility and drivers of policy implementation.
The NCEC will continue to develop its programme of work on guidelines for patient safety and quality.
A structured and systematic approach to wider decision making in the Department, employing standardised criteria and processes such as systematic evidence reviews and budget impact analyses has the potential to improve the quality of decision making, inform prioritisation and policy development and demonstrate transparency and accountability in decision making.
The work of the NCEC as outlined above provides a useful model for the potential value of this approach.
For this broader Departmental work we will, over the next three years, review and develop the decision making processes which support policy development and prioritisation in a number of key patient facing areas, including for example, immunisation policy, screening and other population based preventive programmes, policies relating to the use of blood, organs and other tissues, health promotion and improvement guidelines e.g. exercise, healthy eating, alcohol consumption and the use of medications (new and existing).
Sustainability and Budgeting
The Programme for a Partnership Government sets out our intention to work with the Oireachtas to sustain appropriate annual increases in the Health Budget.
Expenditure will be based on multi-year budgeting supported by a five year Health Service Plan based on realistic and verifiable projections.
The development of a 5 year plan will take account of the deliberations of the All Party Oireachtas Committee on the Future of Healthcare.
The funding increases provided in recent years to the HSE, and the HSE's enhanced Performance and Accountability framework, provide an important basis for planning health expenditure and the operation of the health services within the limits determined by the Oireachtas.
Health Service Structures and Governance The health service is currently embarked on a major programme of change.
Over the last number of years, seven Hospital Groups3 have been created (with approximately six to eleven hospitals in each group) and nine Community Health Organisations4 (CHO) which manage primary, community and social care services.
The development of these Hospital Groups and CHO structures also raises questions about the long-term future development of HSE Corporate.
The Programme for a Partnership Government states “We will continue the process of dismantling the HSE, evolving it into a Health Commission”.
The Minister for Health has indicated that he will not pursue further structural reforms pending the report of the Committee on the Future of Healthcare. Workforce Planning and Skill Mix
The largest component of health expenditure is represented by the pay costs of staff.
In a situation of financial constraints and global shortage of particular health professionals, it is important that as a country we achieve an optimum skill mix, a positive work environment to attract and retain staff and very good output from all the staff resources deployed.
A National Integrated Strategic Framework for Health Workforce Planning is being developed in association with the HSE, the education sector and professional regulators to guide the planning of the health workforce into the future.
eHealth
Information technology is an essential tool in the modernisation of health service delivery and in enabling the connection required amongst service users, professionals and organisations to achieve integrated care.
It is also increasingly critical in supporting patient safety.
A number of important elements have recently been put into place such as The Office of the Chief Information Officer (in the HSE), the eHealth Ireland Advisory Committee and the Clinical Information Officers Council.
An overall eHealth Strategy was published in 2013 and the Health Innovation Hub Ireland was launched in 2016.
The Health Identifier Act has been enacted providing the legal basis for a single health identifier for every member of the public, to support patient safety and the eHealth agenda.
A legislative basis to protect and improve the management, use and access to sensitive patient health information is also required to ensure the eHealth environment aligns with the new EU Regulation on Data Protection.
Further legislative actions and investment in eHealth will be a key priority for the period of this strategy, over the course of which we will work in partnership with the HSE and eHealth Ireland to establish a national electronic health record at the heart of a more connected and integrated health service.
The Department is progressing the Health Information and Patient Safety Bill which among other matters sets out a regulatory framework for health information resources and data-matching programmes.
Modernising Health Facilities
Suitable and appropriate facilities are required to support health and social care delivery across the sector, particularly as the balance shifts from a hospital-centric service to one located more in the community.
There is a range of capital projects on-going and planned over the next three year period, including development of the key priority projects as outlined in the Actions table below, which are designed to complement the overall effort to maximise the effectiveness and efficiency of the health services.
Funding Models
The Programme for a Partnership Government confirmed the Government’s continued commitment to the implementation of Activity Based Funding (ABF, previously known as Money Follows the Patient) – a model whereby hospitals and other healthcare providers are funded based on the quality and quantity of the services they deliver for patients as opposed to historical budgets.
Linking budgets with activity will drive efficiency and increase transparency in the provision of high quality services for patients.
We will work with the HSE to ensure that ABF is further developed and that: the model is expanded to encompass outpatient activity; the model commences linking provider payments with clinical objectives; and the building blocks required to determine the cost of community services are developed.
We will also work with the HSE to develop a new ABF Implementation Plan for the period after 2017.
The Department will continue work in relation to the development of a healthcare commissioning model that will be appropriate and beneficial within the Irish context, and that links resources to the assessed needs of patients and clients, and ensures clear accountability throughout the system.
Private Health Insurance
Another important driver of activity in the health system is private health insurance, held by almost half of the population.
In line with Government policy, the Department seeks to promote a sustainable, community-rated voluntary private health insurance market.
The Department oversees the regulation of the market and the system of risk equalisation required to support community-rating.
The Department will continue work to improve the effectiveness of the risk equalisation scheme by introducing a more refined measure of health status.
We will also continue to monitor market developments to ensure that the health needs of insured people are met in an efficient and effective manner.
The Department also has a particular role in relation to the VHI and wil continue appropriate oversight arrangements.
Securing Cost-Effective Access to Medicines for People Medicines play a key role in improving the health of people in Ireland.
5. Develop a high-performing Department to lead and oversee the health and social care sector Civil Service Renewal and Working Better Together Organisational Change Programme
We are fully committed to the ongoing programme of change in the Civil Service, including through the Working Better Together Change Programme which will be a core element in our Department’s contribution to Civil Service Renewal.
The Department has embarked on a significant change programme entitled Working Better Together since 2015.
The programme’s vision is 'a better environment in which to deliver our work, where on an on-going basis high performance is achieved, where collaborative working is promoted, and where we can all develop our knowledge and skills'.
It is working towards achieving a Department which is:
1. Focused on priority outcomes – using our knowledge and skills to solve problems in collaboration with others;
2. Evidence-informed – using data and research to make better policies and decisions;
3. Responsible and accountable – where we have high standards for ourselves and others, we work together to demonstrate the achievement of these standards and we are accountable to each other for the quality and timeliness of our work, particularly where others are depending on our input;
4. Supportive of staff in giving of their best and taking initiative - giving credit where it is due;
5. Committed to the learning, personal and career development of all staff – including our own personal development - and supportive of people’s health and wellbeing;
6. Open in sharing information relevant for others and collaborating across and outside the organisation.
Following a structured process of consultation, engagement and design with staff, the Department was restructured during 2015 and an integrated programme of 14 change actions has been agreed for 2016/2017.
A Management Board Sub-Committee, chaired by the Secretary General and representative of all levels of the Department, has been established to oversee implementation of these actions.
An Implementation Support Unit is also in place to support implementation of the change programme.
Enhanced Policy-Making Capabilities and Strengthened Oversight The Department is strengthening its capacity in a number of areas, including policy making, strategy development, research and analytics, strategic oversight and governance, and its programme and project management.
As part of the Department’s restructuring, new cross-Department structures and processes have been established which will further these aims over the coming years, such as :     
New corporate divisions for governance and performance, and for policy and strategy A new division for Research and Development and Health Analytics A new Management Board sub-committee for policy development A new National Patient Safety Office The Department’s Programme Management Office and the HSE are designing a programme management approach to the ongoing health system improvement agenda.
Improvements in Research, Analytics and Evaluation The R&D and Health Analytics Division, encompassing a statistical and analytics service, will play a critical role in supporting the Department to further develop its evidence-informed approach to policy development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
The Department will lead on strategy for research and innovation in the health sector.
Health research is key to achieving the objectives of the health system.
It delivers knowledge, insights and evidence to address challenges.
In particular, the Department will continue to support the Health Research Board in implementing its Strategy 2016-2020 Research Evidence Action.
In addition, the new Research Services Unit within the R&D and Health Analytics Division will ensure that research and evaluation is at the core of policy formulation and decision making within the Department itself. This unit will provide research support 21
and advice for policy units, supported by the Irish Government Economic and Evaluation Service (IGEES), will manage internal and external research programmes aligned with departmental priorities and will act as a broker to harness learning and insights from the research community (national and international) to inform the work of the Department on key issues.
Under the current public spending code the Department is required to work with the HSE on the rolling value for money (VFM) assessment of spending programmes.
This will be in the form of VFM and Policy Reviews and smaller Focused Policy Assessments.
This will be a significant evaluation undertaking given the range of programmes and scale of spending in health, and the level of analysis required.
Governance Framework for the Department of Health The Department's Governance Framework has been drafted in accordance with the Corporate Governance Standard for the Civil Service5.
The objectives of this Governance Framework are to ensure that:  the Department’s systems of accountability and responsibility are effective, robust, clear, and identifiable, and  the Department evolves so that it can better adapt to social, political, environmental and economic changes.
The Department’s governance arrangements are underpinned by a compliance process based on good knowledge management as well as monitoring and review arrangements.
The Department is developing a Governance Compliance Framework in accordance with best practice and it will have regard to the Risk Management Guidance issued by the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform in February 2016.
It will also work to strengthen governance arrangements for the bodies under its aegis (See Appendix 2) to ensure they comply with the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform’s Code of Practice for Governance of State Bodies (August 2016).
Cross-Government working
Making Ireland Tobacco free by 2025 (less than 5% of the population smoking)
Introducing a health levy on sugar-sweetened drinks
The extension of Breastcheck to all women aged 65 to 69
Completing work and commencing implementation of a new National Drugs Strategy within 12 months
We will support a health-led rather than criminal justice approach to drugs use including legislating for injection rooms Implementing the National Maternity Strategy
Implementing the National Dementia Strategy
Publishing a plan for advancing Neuro-Rehabilitation services in the community
We will also propose legislation on the regulation of surrogacy and assisted human reproduction services
We will also propose legislation on the family consent and an opt-out register for organ donation before the end of 2017
We will increase funding for the Health Research Board
We will develop National Patient Disease Registries
Prioritise the passage of the Human Tissue Bill
Prioritise the passage of the Health Information and Safety Bill.
We will implement the National Rare Diseases Plan
We will ensure appropriate care pathways are in place to improve cancer services and invest in end of life care, including the provision of hospice and ‘end of life care’ during the perinatal period, infancy, childhood and adulthood.
We will bring into operation further hospices, the construction of which local communities have funded.
We will encourage the development of a hospice in the Midlands and North- East, and home care in regions where there are no hospices.
We will work with nongovernmental organisations to improve information and awareness of end of life services, particularly those which provide people with palliative care in the location they choose.
We will also assist local communities and schools in purchasing defibrillators for public places DHealth
Support the Departments of Health and Social Protection in working together to pursue a “Fit for Work Programme” to support more people to get back to work if they have an illness or disability.
In advance of, and in preparation for the 2017 review of the Capital Plan 2016-2021, the new Government will undertake a national hospital bed capacity review to establish the number, type and location of beds required into the future, recognising the need for a range of beds including critical care, palliative and day case bed stock.
In 2012, the first ever Carer’s Strategy was published.
We are committed to implementing it in full.
We wish to see greater involvement of family carers in the preparation of care plans, aiding the provision of care, together with more accessible training and respite care, to facilitate full support.
We will support improved access to counselling supports for carers.
Similar to Free GP care for the under 6s, earlier engagement with dental care would encourage disease prevention and promote oral hygiene.
We support the introduction of a preventative dental care package for the under 6s.
Together with existing dental checks at 6, 9 and 12 years, every child under 12 would be entitled to a comprehensive preventive dental health programme.
We will consult on how to introduce greater awareness and prevention of mental health problems for young people.
For teaching staff also, we will support SafeTALK and ASIST courses.
We support the extension of services, such as Jigsaw, which is free to access and does not require GP referral, which are more informal and attractive to young people.
Excessive alcohol and drug consumption can do lasting damage to the lives of our young people.
We will enact the Public Health (Alcohol) Bill.
We will also strengthen regulation of alcohol advertising to children.
We support the expansion of Local Drug Taskforce projects.
We will also significantly reduce the cost of medicines by introducing an annual cap on the Drugs Payment Scheme and reducing prescription charges for medical card holders.
We will improve supports and services for older people to live independently in their own home
Will build GP capacity to respond to patients needs through access to X-rays, ultrasound and other investigations as well as the expansion of chronic disease management in general practice.
In addition to diabetes, which is already being dealt with in general practice we will seek to cover chronic pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, heart failure and a trial fibrillation, so that patients can keep their care in their community close to home.
While we will also increase the number of GP training places, we recognise the need to increase the number of therapists and other health professionals in our primary care centres to maximise the potential of services.
We will expand the role of community pharmacists in managing the health of their patients and in medicine prescription.
We recognise the role the Public Health Nurse plays in communities.
We will expand the Public Health Nurse (PHN) service and provide greater administrative support for them.
We will increase funding for homecare packages and home help every year.
We will introduce a uniform homecare service so all recipients can receive a quality support, 7 days per week, where possible.
We will invest in and support new technologies that offer more support, confidence and value, including through the Health Innovation Hub.
We will review legislation relating to elder abuse.
€385million in capital funding has been secured for the replacement and refurbishment of 90 public nursing homes across the country.
This is one of the most comprehensive programmes of investment in public nursing home facilities undertaken by the State.
We will continue to upgrade, refurbish and rebuild public nursing home facilities and district hospitals.
We will provide additional funding for the Nursing Home Support Scheme to keep the Fair Deal scheme at approximately 4 weeks.
We will introduce changes as soon as practicable to remove discrimination against small business and family farms under the Fair Deal Nursing Home Scheme.
Guarantee the future sustainability of GP practices in disadvantaged urban areas DHealth 14
We will provide support for the Men’s Shed network. DHealth
Support the expansion of Local Drug Taskforce projects
Appendix 2 – Bodies under our aegis Non-Commercial State Bodies Dental Council
Dietitians Registration Board
Food Safety Authority of Ireland
Food Safety Promotion Board - Safefood Health Information and Quality Authority Health Insurance Authority
Health Products Regulatory Authority Health Research Board
Health and Social Care Professionals Council (CORU) Health Service Executive Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal
Irish Blood Transfusion Service
National Cancer Registry Board National Paediatric Hospital Development Board National Treatment Purchase Fund Nursing and Midwifery Board of Ireland Occupational Therapists Registration Board Optical Registration Board
Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland
Physiotherapists Registration Board Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Council Radiographers Registration Board
Social Care Workers Registration Board Social Workers Registration Board Speech and Language Therapists Registration Board
Commercial State Bodies
Voluntary Health Insurance (VHI)
The health service has been through a very difficult period with rising demand but static budgets.
However, as a result of the enormous sacrifices made by people, our economy is now recovering.
There are more people at work, more trade is being done, and more new businesses are opening.
The Government wants to sustain the recovery, make it real for more people, and extend it to all regions.
That means more money in people's pockets, getting back to full employment, investing in infrastructure, and rebuilding and reforming public services like health.
I have set out five major themes for action over the next few years.
These include Healthy Ireland - improving our health and wellbeing as individuals and as a nation; improving patient outcomes and patient safety; moving towards universal health care; investing in IT and modernising our infrastructure; and embedding structural and financial reforms.
This Statement of Strategy for the Department of Health sets out a range of actions to pursue that agenda over the period 2015-2017.
Our most important resource is our people and we are lucky to have a committed and skilled staff in our health services.
I look forward to working with them, the Secretary General and staff of the Department, and Minister of State Lynch, to deliver on our aims.
Minister for Health
Introduction by the Secretary General
Health is intrinsic to the life of our fellow citizens and working in the Department of Health provides us with the opportunity to improve health outcomes and the health and social care services.
This Statement of Strategy is submitted to the Minister for Health under Section 5(1) of the Public Service Management Act, 1997.
It sets out a range of ambitious and important initiatives.
We will report upon and be held accountable for delivery of these actions.
Where opportunities and resources allow, we will go further - all the time, providing leadership intended to improve health outcomes and the health services over the life of this Strategy.
The Department of Health – Role and Main Functions Our values
Organisational Analysis
Environmental Analysis
Priority Areas
Deliver improved patient outcomes
Implement agreed steps towards universal healthcare
Statement of Government Priorities (July 2014)
Reform operational systems to drive better outcomes
Introduce innovative funding models
Modernise health facilities and ICT infrastructure
Develop the Department’s workforce and capability
Introduction
1. This is the Statement of Strategy for the Department of Health 2015-2017.
We identify the main risks, challenges and opportunities we face.
We then set out the actions we will take, organised into seven priority areas.
2. This Government set out an ambitious reform agenda for the health sector, founded on the commitment to establish a single-tier health service where access to services is based on need and not on ability to pay.
This Statement of Strategy takes account of that reform agenda and the Statement of Government Priorities, July 2014 (See Appendix A).
It also incorporates Government policy commitments set out in Future Health and Healthy Ireland:
A Framework for Improved Health and Wellbeing 2013 - 2025 as well as Patient Safety First, the Public Service Reform Plan and the Civil Service Renewal Plan.
Our Aim
3. Our overall aim is to improve the health and wellbeing of people in Ireland by:
providing the healthcare people need;
delivering high quality services;
and getting best value from health system resources.
4. The core aim of health policy must be to improve the health and wellbeing of people in Ireland.
It encompasses increasing healthy behaviours, focussing on prevention and early detection, reducing health inequalities and improving the health status of vulnerable groups and providing children with a healthy start to life, helping older people, those with disabilities and those affected by mental illness to live as independently as possible.
5. While we seek to address health and wellbeing, we must also ensure that people can access the healthcare they need when they need it and where they need it.
This encompasses improving access to emergency care, shorter waiting times, delivering services as close to home as possible and enabling prompt and fair access to those services.
6. The services delivered must be of the highest quality to ensure patient safety.
Care must be delivered in the right setting with high quality clinical treatment delivered consistently and on an integrated basis.
7. Finally, and particularly given the financial constraints we must deal with, we must get best value from our resources through strong corporate and clinical governance, sound resource and financial management, skilled and motivated staff working in a nurturing and sustainable environment.
We need to ensure that policy and practice are informed by appropriate health research and evidence.
8. We have a range of actions that we plan to pursue over the lifetime of this strategy to achieve our aim.
We’ve organised these actions into priority areas, set out below.
It’s important to note that to one extent or another all of these actions are interrelated and interdependent.
Drive the Healthy Ireland agenda
Deliver improved patient outcomes
Reform operational systems to drive better outcomes
Implement agreed steps towards universal healthcare
Introduce innovative funding models
Modernise health facilities and ICT infrastructure
9. We must measure our progress so we know if we have succeeded.
Some actions are self-explanatory in terms of progress, like building primary care centres, but others require different types of measures, like gathering and analysing patients’ experiences of services provided or measuring patient health outcomes.
Performance measures are set out as part of our Action Plan (see Appendix C).
10. As a separate priority area (Develop the Department’s workforce and capability), we’ve set out how we plan to develop our own workforce and our own capability.
We want to become an employer of choice.
We want to empower our own staff to be the best that they can be, for themselves, and in order to enhance our ability to lead the health services in the short, medium and longer-terms.
The Department of Health – Role and Main Functions
11. Our distinct role is fourfold.
We provide leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes.
We deliver governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services.
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes
 fully leverage the knowledge, skills and support of the entire health system in developing agreed objectives
 develop communication strategies to represent the value of health policies, services and outcomes
 promote and monitor system progress in achieving health and social outcomes Governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services
 lead in the design and architecture of the whole health sector  set and communicate priorities and performance standards
 lead the negotiation of resources and ensure they are allocated in furtherance of value for money obligations associated with public funds
 implement performance oversight systems and techniques to hold the system to account through goal definition, monitoring, evaluation and impact assessment
 support the Minister, Minister of State and Department officials in fulfilling accountability to the Oireachtas and the public
An organisational environment where, on an ongoing basis, high performance is achieved and the knowledge and skills of staff are developed
 implement excellent systems of internal communication to promote organisationwide knowledge of goals, values, strategy and processes and facilitate staff in contributing to organisational innovation and success
 provide support services and a work environment which ensure that all staff are valued to give of their best and provided with opportunities to learn and develop
 ensure performance is assessed and managed effectively at individual, team and corporate level
 gain recognition for our commitment to a supportive, high performance work environment amongst our staff and across the civil service and within the health sector
 support staff in accessing better evidence and the views of citizens
13. It is acknowledged that, in supporting the Minister and the Government, a very significant part of the Department’s day-to-day activities involve the preparation of information for the Oireachtas.
These activities cut across all dimensions of the role of the Department outlined above, particularly so in relation to that of governance and performance oversight of services.
14. In 2014, the staff of the Department prepared almost 3,500 replies to parliamentary questions (and another 4,200 were processed for direct reply by the HSE) and 5,300 responses to Ministerial representations.
We prepared information for 630 topical issues and Seanad adjournments and 429 briefing notes for Leaders Questions.
234 Freedom of Information (FOI) requests were responded to.
Although not spread evenly across the Department’s 339 staff, that represents an average of almost 30 such activities per staff member, in addition to their other duties.
Our Values
15. In 2014, the Government published the Civil Service Renewal Plan.
The success of the Plan depends on the involvement and commitment of Civil Service staff, including the staff of this Department.
It will require collective ownership, strong leadership and good programme management.
It will also require a commitment to shared values and so we undertake to be guided by the shared values of civil service renewal:
A deep-rooted public service ethos of independence, integrity, impartiality, equality, fairness and respect
A culture of accountability, efficiency and value for money The highest standards of professionalism, leadership and rigour.
Organisational Analysis
16. Like other Departments, our workload has increased, while staff numbers have reduced.
Over the last five years, through retirements, incentivised schemes and the transfer of functions to the newly established Department of Children and Youth Affairs, staff numbers have reduced from 540 WTEs to 339.
In all, 90 staff retired and 92 transferred to DCYA, with the balance moving elsewhere in the civil service.
To deal with this additional pressure and improve our effectiveness it is necessary for us to focus on organisational development.
17. This organisational development programme includes improved role definition and prioritisation
– both documented in the Strategy
– and improved internal communication and staff engagement, effective staff development, better systems for organising, allocating and managing staff and evaluating performance.
18. In line with the corporate priorities set out in the Statement of Strategy, we are currently realigning resources and changing organisational structure.
The Department is also in the process of developing a comprehensive workforce plan for 2015 to equip the Department to deliver on its objectives.
Health reform to date
19. The publication of the 2011 Programme for Government set out an ambitious reform agenda for the health services at a time of great economic and financial challenge.
We set out how we would achieve these reforms in 2012, in Future Health:
A Strategic Framework for the Health Services 2012-2015.
Future Health is the Government’s policy for reforming the health services and is complemented by:
Patient Safety First and Healthy Ireland, the national framework for improving the health and wellbeing of people in Ireland; and, our ongoing commitment to improving patient safety.
20. In Future Health, we set out plans to implement the Government’s objective of a singletier health service, to enable the population have equal access to healthcare based on need, not income.
This included the introduction of universal primary care, including GP care without fees for all and universal hospital care.
In order to deliver the reform while maintaining access and quality the reforms were planned on a phased basis – a series of separate projects organised and managed together.
Specific reforms in place or being delivered include:
The Government published the Healthy Ireland framework to improve the health and wellbeing of people in Ireland and implementation is underway
We prepared legislation, now implemented, to establish the HSE Directorate and return the HSE Vote to the Department to enhance accountability and efficiency.
The legislation to provide GP care without fees to all children under 6 years of age is in place.
The Government approved a plan for reforming primary and continuing care with implementation of new Community Healthcare Organisations now commenced.
Hospital Groups are also being established, with CEOs and Chairs of Boards appointed;
We published a policy paper on Activity Based Funding (also known as Money Follows the Patient) and we are overseeing its implementation by the HSE.
The White Paper on Universal Health Insurance (UHI) is now being costed and a roadmap for next steps developed.
Measures are being put in place to improve the private health insurance market including a new Risk Equalisation Scheme, Lifetime Community Rating and more attractive rates for young adults.
The National eHealth Strategy was published and is being implemented and the Health Identifier Act was enacted ; We have implemented key patient safety and quality reforms through the Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) and through the HSE.
Environmental Analysis
21. Since we published our last Statement of Strategy, the economy has started to turn around and employment has begun to increase.
Arising out of Budget 2015, we are in a two year process which stabilises the budget and allows for existing levels of service to continue, along with some targeted enhancements.
There is a modest increase in the 2015 Health budget, the first increase in seven years.
The spending ceiling for health in 2016 has also already been increased upwards by a further €174 million.
However, the period of this strategy still remains a real challenge.
There are significant cost pressures and unmet needs.
Drivers of demand and cost include our rising and ageing population and the increase in chronic conditions and advances in medical technology come at a higher price.
Our progress in diagnosis and screening for cancers and chronic diseases means more people are identified who require treatments.
Health services all around the world are struggling with the effects of the downturn, rising costs and increased demand and Ireland is not exempt.
22. Over the past decade, life expectancy in Ireland has increased by almost three years (consistently higher than the EU average).
Much of this increase is due to significant reductions in major causes of death.
Since 2004, there has been a reduction in mortality rates for most major causes and an 18% reduction overall in the same period.
These increases point to improvements in general health and the health services have played and will continue to play a large part in these improvements.
Ireland also continues to have the highest levels of self-perceived health of any EU country.
23. Despite reductions in the numbers of births in recent years, the fertility rate in Ireland remains the highest in the EU.
In terms of ageing, Ireland is now beginning to catch up with other European countries.
The population of those aged 65 years and over has been increasing at a faster rate than our EU neighbours - by 20,000 people annually - and is expected to almost double in the next 20 years, with the greatest proportional increase in the 85+ age group.
24. This trend will have implications for future planning and health service delivery.
Rapid ageing of the population in conjunction with lifestyle-related health threats present major challenges now and for the future in sustaining and improving health and health services in Ireland.
In order to support our ageing population to maximise their health and wellbeing, we need to provide comprehensive primary and community care services, which allow them to remain in their local communities for as long as possible.
Lifestyle related health threats which impact on all of our population – the young, middle-aged and elderly - are increasing the range and type of chronic diseases our health and personal social care services have to deal with and we must strengthen primary care as the most effective setting for supporting the population in disease prevention and management.
Drive the Healthy Ireland Agenda
25. A key part of improving the health of our population is to focus on prevention, early intervention and empowering people to look after their own health and wellbeing.
In 2013, the Government approved Healthy Ireland - A Framework for Improved Health and Wellbeing 2013-2025 and implementation is underway.
Healthy Ireland isn’t just a strategy for the Department of Health or the health services.
Healthy Ireland takes a whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach to improving health and wellbeing and the quality of people’s lives.
Our vision is a Healthy Ireland, where everyone can enjoy physical and mental health and wellbeing to their full potential, where wellbeing is valued and supported at every level of society and is everyone’s responsibility.
Healthy Ireland’s goals are to:
Increase the proportion of people who are healthy at all stages of life Reduce health inequalities
Protect the public from threats to health and wellbeing Create an environment where every individual and sector of society can play their part in achieving a healthy Ireland
26. There are a number of public health challenges which we must address like obesity, tobacco and the misuse of alcohol.
Our goal in relation to obesity is to increase the number of adults and children with a healthy weight.
Our policy on smoking is set out in Tobacco Free Ireland.
It is to promote and move towards a tobacco free society by 2025.
Tobacco Free Ireland was the first policy document to be launched under the Healthy Ireland framework.
In 2012, we published the Steering Group Report on a National Substance Misuse Strategy and in 2015, it is planned to introduce an extensive package of measures to deal with alcohol misuse, including the drafting of a Public Health (Alcohol) Bill.
Measures to be implemented include minimum unit pricing for alcohol products, the regulation of advertising and marketing of alcohol, structural separation of alcohol from other products in mixed trading outlets and health labelling of alcohol products.
27. With cancer incidence projected to double by 2040, the growth in demand for cancer services will continue to increase, particularly in view of an ageing population.
A key task in the coming years will be to work to prevent cancer occurring in the first place as far as possible and to tackle cancer early when it does occur.
That is why we are developing a third cancer strategy, for publication in 2016, which will provide the focus for cancer control for the next decade.
28. Our specific deliverables in driving the Healthy Ireland agenda over the next three years are:
Public Health (Alcohol) Bill
Legislation for the sale of tobacco products and non-medicinal delivery systems
Commence the Protection of Children’s Health (Tobacco Smoke in Mechanically Propelled Vehicles) Act 2014
Transposition of the EU Tobacco Products Directive
Implement the Steering Group Report on a National Substance Misuse Strategy 2012
Implement Tobacco Free Ireland
Publish the first Healthy Ireland survey
Publish an obesity policy
Publish a new national drugs strategy
Lead implementation of health commitments in Better Outcomes Brighter Futures
– the National Policy Framework for Children and Young People
Work with the HSE to complete a climate change adaptation plan for the health sector
Progress the achievement of the highest standards of food safety by ensuring that an appropriate legal framework, policies and relevant structures are in place.
Protect the health and safety of the public with regard to medicinal products, cosmetics and medical devices through an appropriate legal framework, policies and structures.
Deliver improved patient outcomes
29. Delivering improved patient outcomes covers a range of areas.
Primary care services, encompassing team-based delivery by GPs and a wide range of other health professionals and provided in the communities where people live, can meet the great majority of people’s day-to-day healthcare needs.
The capacity and range of services in primary care must continue to be developed, as a cornerstone of the health system’s response to the pressures of a population that is ageing and at the same time, living with an increasing incidence of chronic disease.
Structured primary care services in the community, integrated with social care and mental health services, as well as the acute hospital system, have the greatest potential to contribute to the achievement of improved patient outcomes.
30. The National Clinical Programmes have greatly improved services in many specialised areas, such as stroke and cardiology.
It is important that they are very much at the centre of operational delivery and reform.
Therefore, it is planned to organise them into five integrated care programmes and embed them into the HSE Service Directorates.
Integrated care programmes are how we link the different areas of the health services (primary care, acute hospitals, social and continuing care) and how, within those settings, different areas can best link and work together to improve the patient experience.
31. An equally important aspect of delivering improved patient outcomes is enhancing patient safety, quality and clinical effectiveness.
It is of the utmost importance that patient safety remains an overriding priority across the health service.
We first set out our approach to patient safety and quality in Patient Safety First which is our ongoing commitment to create the momentum for positive change towards patient safety.
All health service staff, individually and collectively, will continue to have a responsibility for the quality of services they deliver to the patients and service users in their care.
It is important that they integrate a commitment to quality and safety into their core work and practice.
Priority areas that will continue to be the focus of attention include medication safety, healthcare associated infections and the implementation of the national early warning score.
We will extend the suite of National Clinical Effectiveness Committee (NCEC) National Clinical Guidelines and establish the NCEC National Clinical Audit function.
This will promote the reduction of inappropriate variation in practice leading to improved patient safety.
32. We are committed to developing a social and continuing care system that maximises independence and achieves value for resources invested.
The groups for which most social care supports are provided currently are those people with disability, older people and those with mental health difficulties.
The common thread running through all of these groups is the need to provide a service which holds the individual care recipient at its centre.
We need to foster innovation and ensure services maximise independence and achieve value for money.
Such a system will enhance quality of care and give individuals much greater control over their own care.
33. Our strategic approach, based on international best practice, is to meet the needs of individuals in these care groups through an integrated system, subject to robust governance and accountability frameworks, quality assured and regulated.
For older people, we want to support them to live independently in their own homes and communities for as long as possible.
For people with disabilities, we want to support them to participate to their full potential in economic and social life.
We will continue to develop and modernise our mental health services in line with A Vision for Change and update the document itself over the course of this Strategy.
This includes the ongoing development and re-configuration of adult and child and adolescent mental health teams, along with other specialist mental health services.
34. Our specific deliverables in the priority area of improving patient outcomes are:
Agree priorities for the extension of HIQA’s regulatory remit, commencing with private healthcare providers.
Establish national healthcare quality reporting system, including publication of annual report
Extend the suite of NCEC national clinical guidance and audit
Develop and implement a public health plan for hepatitis C
Publish and implement a maternity care strategy
Publish and implement a cancer strategy
Strengthen indemnity arrangements with providers to enable improved quality and patient safety
Examine processes for addressing claims of clinical negligence in conjunction with the Department of Justice and Equality
Implement five integrated care programmes to introduce clinically-led, multidisciplinary integrated models of care in respect of:
Patient flow
Older people
Chronic disease prevention and management
Children’s health
Maternal health
In 2015, achieve a one third reduction in delayed discharges and in the average number of patients waiting for admission on trolleys in ED for over 9 hours (Q4 average number of delayed discharges and SDU TrolleyGAR) and reduce that further in later years
Specialty based waiting lists for each hospital to be made public by Summer 2015
Publish the national framework for suicide prevention
Implement the Emergency Department Taskforce Action Plan and review regularly to ensure optimal effect;
Review assessment of needs provision under Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005
Progress the reconfiguration of adult day services, including the provision of appropriate services for young school leavers with disabilities who have continuing support needs
Progress the reconfiguration of residential services as recommended in Time to Move from Congregated Settings
Reconfigure services under the Progressing Disabilities Services Programme for Children and Young People 0-18
Publish the general scheme of a bill to regulate assisted human reproduction and stem cell research, with a view to introducing legislation to regulate this area for the first time.
Implement agreed steps towards universal healthcare
35. During the lifetime of this strategy, we will make the first concrete steps to Universal Healthcare in 2015, by extending GP services without fees to the under 6s and over 70s.
Therefore, by the end of 2015, almost half of the population (49%) will have access to GP services, without fees.
That will be a major step on the way to universal health care.
36. Over the lifetime of the Strategy, we will plan for the further extension of GP services without fees to more of the population.
We will put in place models of care that improve the way people can access services, by supporting new models of chronic disease management, increasing GP access to diagnostic services and progressing the provision of minor surgery.
We will also commence development of a revised contractual framework for the provision of publicly funded GP services as part of an integrated health service and agree a new GP contract over the period of this Strategy.
37. We will complete an initial costing analysis of the Universal Health Insurance proposals outlined in the White Paper then revert to Government with a roadmap for next steps.
We will oversee the authorisation process of the VHI by the Central Bank of Ireland as a regulated entity.
To promote a sustainable and affordable private health insurance market we will implement a package of measures to increase the number of people with private health insurance including the introduction of Lifetime Community Rating and Young Adult Rates.
Reform Operational Systems to drive high performance
38. In 2014, the HSE published its plans to establish community healthcare organisations (CHOs) to streamline the management and delivery of primary care, social care and mental health services.
The CHOs will facilitate the integrated delivery of care, in the communities where people live and in association with the acute hospitals so that care pathways are appropriately planned and needs are met in the right setting.
The nine CHOs will operate as part of the HSE and existing community services resources will be re-organised into 90 primary care networks, each headed by a person responsible for care delivery by professionals such as nurses, therapists and social workers.
39. The reorganisation of public hospitals into Hospital Groups is designed to deliver improved outcomes for patients.
The hospitals making up each group of will work together to provide acute care for patients and will work to develop close relationships with health and social care services in the community.
The objective is to maximise the amount of care delivered locally while ensuring that highly specialised and complex care is safely provided in larger hospitals.
We will develop hospital groups and get them up and running, including approving a strategic plan for each group.
We will also develop and implement policy on national specialties.
We will enact legislation to merge the three children’s hospitals into one.
40. We will agree an action plan with the HSE to implement the recommendations of the ambulance service reviews and to develop and implement revised models of care for pre-hospital emergency care.
41. In reforming operational systems, we are conscious of the need to have excellent accountability frameworks throughout the health service.
The Department – and the HSE - will have more autonomy on staffing and human resources as the end of the moratorium on recruitment provides greater room to manage staffing levels.
The return of the Vote to the Department from 2015 is part of this improved accountability framework and will underline the importance of the Department in its monitoring of health spending.
42. Ensuring that we have the right people with the right skills in the right places at the right time is a critical success factor for delivering on our priority areas.
In this context, playing our part in nurturing a health system where high performance is achieved and the knowledge and skills of health service staff are enhanced and developed is key.
Our underlying objective here is to achieve a stable and sustainable workforce, aligned to the achievement of national priorities and clinical and operational improvement.
43. We will develop accountability frameworks for regulated health professionals, both in the context of overall accountability frameworks, but also in the context of enhancing patient safety and strengthening patient advocacy.
We will further strengthen professional regulation through our ongoing programme of modernising the legislation governing professional health regulators.
This will include transposing into Irish law the modernised EU Directive on Professional Qualifications together with the development and enactment of a new Dental Act.
44. In 2013, we enacted legislation (the Health (Pricing and Supply of Medical Goods) Act 2013 to implement generic substitution and reference pricing for drugs and medicines.
Generic substitution – where patients can buy generic medicines at a lower cost than their branded equivalent – has and will continue to generate savings for patients and taxpayers.
In early 2015, we envisage that, by value, 80% of the off-patent market will be subject to reference pricing.
Agreements with the Irish Pharmaceutical Healthcare Association (IPHA) and the Association of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers in Ireland (APMI) have also generated savings for patients and taxpayers.
Over the lifetime of this Strategy, we will secure further economies in State expenditure on drugs and medicines through generic substitution, reference pricing and other arrangements.
45. While we improve our operational systems to drive high performance now, we will also scope and analyse approaches to new health structures with a view to implementing necessary structural changes within an appropriate timeframe.
46. Our specific deliverables in the priority area of refining operational systems to drive high performance are:
Support the improvement of HSE income collection arrangements and the implementation of shared services and external service delivery plans.
Implement agreed HSE Performance Accountability Framework system and monitor implementation of the HSE corporate plan and annual service plans
Support the procurement and phased implementation of a new national financial management system in the HSE.
Implement a new appointment process for State boards in conjunction with the Public Appointments Service;
Develop a mechanism to ensure the implementation of HIQA recommendations made to the HSE
Develop and implement a national integrated strategic framework for health workforce planning;
Develop a sector wide Human Resources Framework and Forum designed to provide best practice advice and guidance to the Health sector create a nationally integrated workforce supply chain.
Enact legislation to merge the three children’s hospitals into one
Introduce innovative funding models
47. The Government remains committed to the introduction of the ‘Activity-Based Funding’ (ABF, also known as Money Follows the Patient) funding model whereby hospitals are paid for the actual work they do.
The funding model, which is a multi-year project, will drive efficiency and increase transparency in the provision of high quality hospital services and will continue to be implemented on a phased basis during and beyond the lifetime of this Strategy.
In 2014, ABF commenced its first phase in 38 hospitals in respect of inpatient and daycase activity.
Over the period of this Strategy, we will further embed ABF in the health services through overseeing the implementation of the HSE’s strategic framework and implementation plan for ABF.
In particular, we will work with the HSE to develop an outpatient classification system and carry out research into incentivised payment systems for community care.
48. The idea of commissioning for better outcomes is fundamental in using resources to drive improvement for patients and service users.
We will develop a policy framework on healthcare commissioning.
49. We’ll also examine the potential to use social impact bonds to finance better outcomes in addiction services and review the contribution of relevant tax reliefs to health policy objectives.
Modernise health facilities and ICT infrastructure
50. Data is a vital component of any modern enterprise and this is especially so for the health services.
The Health Identifiers Act 2014 provides the legislative framework for a national system of unique identifiers for patients and for health service providers for use across the health service, both public and private.
Individual health identifiers (IHIs) are designed to make sure that the right information is associated with the right patient at the point of care.
In addition, identifiers will help make our health service more efficient and will support health reform initiatives including Activity Based Funding.
Health identifiers are a fundamental building block in support of the eHealth agenda.
It is a complex issue which will require detailed planning across all our services so that we can provide adequate data protection and privacy for patients while also enabling valuable patient research and statistical data for professionals so that they can improve work practices and outcomes.
In the lifetime of this strategy, we will establish and implement the individual health identifier.
In 2015, the first identifiers will be issued to patients.
51. In 2014, we launched our ten year eHealth strategy and the HSE recently appointed a Chief Information Officer (CIO).
eHealth is our blueprint for better use of ICT to enhance patient safety, drive efficiencies and increase the quality of care.
We will increase investment in ICT and eHealth and establish eHealth Ireland.
52. We will publish and enact a Health Information Bill which will include measures designed to support the development of information systems and capacity, data quality and the eHealth agenda, promote an improved patient safety culture, encourage health research and strengthen patients’ rights in relation to their health information.
53. Suitable and appropriate facilities are required to support health care delivery.
Significant projects - large and small – have been delivered in recent years.
More have commenced or are in planning.
Through the lifetime of this Strategy, we will seek to ensure that all projects remain on schedule and are delivered on time.
Since March 2011, 42 primary care centres have been delivered – which is almost one each month.
There are about 30 underway – funded through PPPs or leases - and a further 50 locations where projects are at earlier stages of development.
54. The specific deliverables in this priority area are:
Secure planning permission and commence construction works for the new children’s hospital
Lodge a planning application with an Bord Pleanála and commence construction of the national maternity hospital;
Commence construction of the new national forensic mental health campus with a view to completion by end-2017   
Deliver 37 new primary care centres (9 in 2015) and continue to work with the private sector to deliver primary care centres using the operational lease mechanism Deliver radiation oncology units for Cork and Galway and refresh equipment at St Luke’s under the National Plan for Radiology Oncology Pursue alternative public/private options to provide new community nursing units
Develop the Department’s workforce and capability
55. For our own Department, we recognise the need to continue to adapt to change and develop our own workforce and capability.
As a Department, we want to contribute to fostering a unified, professional, responsive, open and accountable Civil Service that inspires confidence and trust, as envisaged in the Civil Service Renewal Plan.
56. We want to enhance staff engagement, promote staff learning and development while securing and allocating our resources effectively.
In this context, we want to ensure our organisational structures are aligned with our priorities and we want to strengthen evidence-based decision making.
In short, we want our Department to be an employer of choice within the Civil Service and beyond.
We want to be a Government Department where people seek to work, where our staff feel appreciated and valued and where their contributions are recognised.
We will champion our commitment to equality and diversity, ensuring our procedures and culture foster inclusivity.
57. We want our employee actions to be directly aligned with our business goals and thus promoting a higher performance level, greater workforce stability and a continuing development of our knowledge, including through effective succession planning.
We want to employ improved business systems to manage common processes, like parliamentary questions, submissions and records management.
58. We are fully committed to the ongoing programme of change in the Civil Service which seeks to build capacity to respond to existing and future challenges and improve the performance of the Civil Service and its staff.
The Civil Service Renewal Plan provides the framework for renewing the Civil Service over the next three years.
The Plan outlines a vision for the Civil Service and practical changes that will create a more unified, professional, responsive and open and accountable Civil Service, providing a world-class service to the State and to the people of Ireland.
Strong leadership and active participation in the implementation of this programme of change will be a key focus over the period.
We also recognise the role that public service agreements play in enabling modernisation of public service delivery.
We will continue to play our part in implementing these agreements.
59. The specific deliverables in this priority area of developing our Department’s workforce and capabilities are:
Implement a communications plan and refine internal communications methodology and tools
Develop and implement a Departmental workforce learning and development plan, with an initial focus on people management skills for managers, and review it every year
Strengthen our governance, business planning, project management and performance management processes
Implement agreed governance structures for the health reform programme, including the ongoing work of the Programme Management Office and the monthly reporting system.
Enhance our information and research capabilities Align organisational structures appropriately.
Design and implement a full communication plan including the establishment of regular and effective staff engagement practices and events
Statement of Government Priorities 2014 relating to the health sector
The Government will implement the Report of the Value for Money and Policy Review of the Disability Services Programme, which recommends a significant restructuring of the disability service by linking budgets to activity, outputs, quality and outcomes for service users.
The new model of personalised, community-based service must provide greater choice for people with disabilities.
Bodies under our aegis
Non-commercial State agencies
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Ireland
Dental Council
Food Safety Authority of Ireland
Health Research Board
Irish Blood Transfusion Service
Health Products Regulatory Authority
Medical Council
Mental Health Commission
National Cancer Registry Board
Opticians Board
Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland
Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Council
Commercial State Agencies
How will we measure success?
Priority area: Drive the Healthy Ireland agenda
Health and wellbeing
 Commence the Protection of Children’s Health (Tobacco Smoke in Mechanically Propelled vehicles) Act 2014.
 Transpose the EU Tobacco Products Directive
 Implement the National Substance Misuse Strategy 2012
 Implement Tobacco Free Ireland
 Publish first Healthy Ireland survey
 Publish Obesity Policy
 Sexual Health Strategy and Obesity Policy published
 New National Drugs Strategy work commenced
 Publish Oral Health Strategy
 Lead the implementation of the National Positive Ageing Strategy
 Develop a national ‘Healthy Workplace’ framework across both public and private sector
 Publish and implement the National Physical Activity Plan under Healthy Ireland
 Drive cross-sectoral implementation of Healthy Ireland
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes
Collaboration to achieve health priorities and contribute to wider social and economic goals
 Public Health legislation introduced
 Transposition of the EU Tobacco Products Directive
 National Substance Misuse Strategy 2012 implemented
 Tobacco Free Ireland implemented
 Healthy Ireland survey published in 2015
Framework we’re developing and the results of the Healthy Ireland survey
Percentage of the population overweight or obese
Percentage of the population smoking
 Publish Code of Conduct setting out Health Service Employers’ responsibilities for optimising performance, safety and overall governance within organisations.
 Establish National Healthcare Quality Reporting System, including publication of annual report
Enhance patient safety, quality and clinical effectiveness Implement integrated care programmes
 Agree priorities for the extension of HIQA’s regulatory remit, commencing with private healthcare providers.
 Extend and implement suite of NCEC National Clinical Practice Guidance and Audit
 Develop and implement a Public Health Plan for Hepatitis C
 Publish and implement a Maternity Care Strategy
 Publish and implement a Cancer Strategy
 Strengthen indemnity arrangements with providers to enable improved quality and patient safety
 Examine processes for addressing claims of clinical negligence in conjunction with the Department of Justice and Equality.
 Implement five Integrated Care Programmes to Primary Relationship with the Department’s role Governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes
 Code of Conduct published and an implementation process agreed
 National Healthcare Quality Reporting System established
 Health Act 2007 amended and HIQA's remit extended to the prioritised areas
 National Clinical Practice Guidance and Audit extended and implemented
 Public Health Plan for Hepatitis C published and being implemented
 Maternity Care and Cancer Strategies published and being implemented
 Indemnity arrangements strengthened
 Processes for addressing clinical negligence claims examined
Delayed Discharges and Waiting Times
 Five integrated care programmes implemented introduce clinically-led, multi-disciplinary integrated models of care in respect of patient flow, older persons, chronic disease prevention and management, children’s health and maternal health
 Develop and implement a plan to address waiting lists
with a focus on very long waiters such that by mid-year, nobody will wait longer than 18 months for in patient and day case treatment or an outpatient appointment, with a further reduction thereafter to no greater than 15 months by end year and reduce further in later years
 Specialty based waiting lists for each hospital to be made public by summer 2015
 Implement the Emergency Department Taskforce Action Plan and review regularly to ensure optimal effect accountable and high quality services
Governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services
 Targets on delayed discharges and patients waiting for admission on trolleys achieved and sustained
 Action plan on waiting lists developed and implemented so that targets achieved and sustained
 ED Taskforce Action Plan implemented
Assisted Human Reproduction
 Publish and enact legislation to regulate assisted human reproduction and stem cell research
Mental Health
Social Care
 Publish National Framework for Suicide Prevention
 Publish review of the Mental Health Act 2001 and make agreed legislative changes
 Update Vision for Change Policy with a focus on implementation of key initiatives
 Review assessment of needs provision under Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005
 Progress the reconfiguration of residential services as recommended in Time to Move on from Congregated Settings
 Reconfigure services under the Progressing Disabilities Services Programme for Children and Young People 0-18s
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes
Governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services
 National Framework for Suicide Prevention published
 Review of Mental Health Act published and legislative changes made
 Fair Deal review recommendations implemented
 Assessment of needs review completed
 Residential and adult day services reconfiguration progressed
Priority area: Implement agreed steps towards Universal Healthcare
Primary Relationship with the Department’s role
 Make the first concrete steps to Universal Healthcare by extending Phase extension of GP cover
 Put in place models of care that improve the way people can access services (e.g. new chronic disease management models, increasing GP access to diagnostic services and progressing the provision of minor surgery services in primary care)
 Oversee the authorisation of the VHI by the CBI
 Implement a package of measures to increase the number of people with health insurance
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes
Scope universal healthcare
 New GP contract implemented
Governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services
 GP services without fees available to all children under 6 and all persons over 70
 Plans in place for further extension of GP services
 New and improved models of care in place
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes
 Next steps agreed
 VHI authorised
 Number of people with health insurance increased
Priority area: Reform operational systems to drive high performance Actions
Develop Hospital Groups
Implement service improvements for the National Ambulance Service
 Get Hospital Groups up and running, including approving a strategic plan for each Group
 Develop and implement policy on national specialties
 Agree an Action Plan with the HSE to implement the recommendations of the ambulance service reviews.
Develop and implement revised models of care for pre-hospital emergency care
New Children’s Hospital Plan for new health service structures
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes
 Strengthen Primary Care structures
 Strategic plans in place for all hospital groups
 New policy on national specialties being implemented
 Action Plan agreed and being implemented
 New models of care for pre-hospital emergency care in place
 CHOs in operation
 Legislation enacted
 Scoping and analysis of approaches to new health structures carried out
 2015 and subsequent HSE NSPs delivered within budget
 HSE Performance Accountability Framework implemented
 Appointments to State boards made in line with new processes
 HIQA recommendations implemented by HSE
Stabilise and build a sustainable workforce
Develop and implement a national integrated strategic framework for of health workforce planning;
Human Resources Framework and Forum in place
Strengthen professional regulation through new legislation and by transposing an EU Directive on Professional Qualifications into Irish law
Implement Health (Misc. Provisions) Bill 2015
Enact new Dental Act
Reduce the cost of medicines for patients and the taxpayer
Improve HSE income collection arrangements
Implement Shared Services Plan
Implement External Service Delivery Plan
Governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcomes
 Savings delivered on drugs and medicines
 More income collected more quickly by the HSE
 Shared services and External services delivery plans implemented.
Priority area: Introduce innovative funding models Actions
Primary Relationship with the Department’s role
Implement Activity Based Funding
 Embed ‘activity-based funding’ in the health services and work to develop outpatient and community classifications for activity-based funding
Governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services
 Efficiencies and increased productivity identified through implementation of ABF
 High quality and timeliness of HIPE coding achieved and measured via performance reports
Commissioning for better outcomes
 Policy framework completed
 Evaluation of Social Impact Bonds conducted
Priority area: Modernise health facilities and ICT infrastructure Actions
Establish Individual Health Identifier
eHealth Strategy
Leadership and policy direction for the health sector to improve health outcome
Department’s role Governance and performance oversight to ensure accountable and high quality services
Health Information Bill
National Maternity Hospital
Mental Health Services (Portrane)
Community Nursing Units (CNUs)
National Plan for Radiology Oncology
Primary Care Centres
 IHI established and in use
 Issue the first Individual Health Identifiers
 eHealth Ireland established and investment increased
 Publish and enact Health Information Bill
 Secure planning permission for the new children’s hospital (St James’s campus) and satellite centres (Blanchardstown and Tallaght) and commence construction works (subject to award of planning permission)  Lodge planning application with An Bord Pleanála and commence construction works
 Commence construction and complete by end 2017 (subject to award of planning permission)
 Deliver 9 Primary Care Centres in 2015 and work to deliver a further 28 by mid-2017
 Continue to work with the private sector to deliver Primary Care Centres using the operational lease mechanism.
 37 Primary Care centres delivered
 Radiation Oncology Units for Cork and Galway
 Operational lease mechanism in use
 Refresh equipment at St Luke’s
 New Community Nursing Units delivered
Improved use of technology
Develop the Department of Health to be an Employer of Choice
 Units delivered and equipment refreshed
Enhance staff engagement
 Implement internal communications plan and refine methodology and tools
An organisational environment where, on an ongoing basis, high performance is achieved and the knowledge and skills of staff are developed
Secure and allocate resources effectively
 Develop and implement a Departmental workforce learning and development plan, with an initial focus on people management skills for managers and review it every year
 Workforce plan in place and reviewed annually
Align organisational structures with strategic priorities
Promote staff learning and development
 Align organisational structures appropriately
 Implement staff learning and development plan
Implement Civil Service Renewal and the health reform programme
 Strengthen Departmental governance, business planning, project management and performance management processes
 Governance structures for health reform agreed and in place
Strengthen evidenced-based decision making
 Processes improved
 Staff learning and development plan in place
Using services when social separation cannot be practiced
Sometimes it will not be possible to practice social separation eg hairdresser.
You must assess the risk before using these services.
To reduce the risk:
Tell the service provider that you are coaxing when booking your appointment
Don't go to places like this too often
Spend as little time as possible in these places
Arrange your appointment at a time and day when there will be few people
Make sure the business follows national hygiene guidelines and understands your needs
Wear a face cover
Wash your hands when you go home
Get help while cooking
There are community supports for people who are cocooning.
Assistance is also available to collect these items
Groceries,
Medication
Other essentials:
In some cases help is also available to get relief from social separation.
Medications and prescriptions
Changes have been made to make it easier for you to find your medicines and prescriptions.
Long term residential care
If you live in a long-term residential center, talk to your caregiver about short walks or fitness.
They will be able to help you decide which option is safe for you
If your carer comes to visit you.
Continue with visits from people who help you with your daily needs.
These include:
Health care workers
Personal carers and
Social carers.
These people can visit you if they have no symptoms of the disease
When carers visit, they should:
Wash his hands first.
Wash their hands often while in your house.
Stay 2 meters away, if possible.
If your carer develops symptoms of the disease
If a carer develops symptoms of the disease, they will not be able to look after you if they become ill.
They should stay away from you until:
5 days without fever
14 days without symptoms of the disease
Contact your carer's organizer to find you another carer.
You should have a list of other people who would look after you if your primary carer became ill
If you are cooking and others in the house with you
Although difficult, you should avoid all unnecessary contact with people in the house when cooking.
Anyone in the house must cook if:
They are over 70 years old
They have any of the diseases that could put them at high risk from the coronavirus
If someone else in the house is under 70 and they don ’ t have any illness that would endanger them, they don ’ t need to cocoon.
They can help you stay safe if:
They follow the advice on social separation and hand hygiene at home.
They spend as little time as possible in rooms with others, for example, in the kitchen and seating areas
Windows are opened to release fresh air into the shared spaces
They use their own towel to dry their hands and crockery
Cutlery, utensils, pots and skillets are thoroughly cleaned
A bathroom is well cleaned by others every time it is used, for example, all surfaces on which you have placed your hand
Clean everything and hand-painted surfaces (eg door handles, kettles and phones) with your normal cleaning products
Staying safe and sound
Staying at home and having little contact with others is difficult.
It can affect your mood or emotions.
You may have low mood, anxiety or difficulty sleeping.
Things you can do to stay healthy:
Move around - get up and move around as much as possible
Go for a walk or meet outdoors but stay 2 meters away from others
Follow our advice on fitness at home
Continue with your daily activities, as usual.
Stay in touch with your friends or relatives over the phone or on social media
If you have no work, or less work than before
Your employer may have closed their business and sent you home.
Where this is temporary, this is called a temporary layoff.
If it is permanent, you may be made redundant.
Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme
Your employer may be able to continue to pay you under the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS) and if so, you do not need to apply for a social welfare payment.
You cannot apply for EWSS yourself, it is administered by Revenue through your employer’s payroll.
The EWSS replaced the COVID19 Temporary Wage Subsidy Scheme on 1 September 2020.
If you were getting a Working Family Payment, this will continue while you are being paid under the EWSS.
COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment
The COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment (PUP) is for employees and selfemployed people living in Ireland who have lost their employment due to COVID19.
If you lost your job for another reason, you can apply for a jobseeker’s payment.
You can get PUP if you are on a temporary layoff from employment, or if you have been made redundant.
PUP is available to any registered employee or selfemployed worker who has lost all of their work because of COVID19 and is resident in Ireland.
This includes people on student visas and asylum seekers.
If you have dependents, you may get a higher payment by applying for a jobseeker’s payment.
You must be genuinely seeking work to qualify for PUP.
Jobseeker’s Allowance and Jobseeker’s Benefit
If you have lost your job and have dependents, you may get a higher payment if you apply for Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB) or Jobseeker's Allowance (JA) instead of PUP.
This is because PUP does not pay anything extra for dependents.
A dependent can be your spouse or partner if they are earning less than €350 per week, or children under 18, or under 22 and in full time education.
If you were selfemployed, you can claim Jobseeker’s Benefit (SelfEmployed) instead of JB.
Rates for adult dependents have increased temporarily.
See 'adult dependent increases' below for more details.
JB is based on your PRSI contributions.
JA is means tested.
You apply for both payments at the same time and the Department decides which one you qualify for.
If the number of days you work have decreased, you may be entitled to Short Time Work Support.
You must be unemployed for 3 days per week (excluding Sunday) to qualify for this.
You can get this even if your employer is paying you through the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS).
If your hours have been reduced but you continue to work for more than 3 days per week (for example, you have been asked to work 5 mornings per week), you may qualify for Supplementary Welfare Allowance.
Family payments
If you are parenting alone you may be entitled to OneParent Family Payment.
The other parent of your child may have reduced the maintenance they pay to support your child.
You should notify your local Intreo centre in this case.
You can get an increase to your payment for up to 12 weeks.
After this, you payment will be reassessed.
You should also check if you qualify for Working Family Payment if you have dependent children and your hours or pay have been reduced.
If you are pregnant and getting PUP or being paid through the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS), you can still apply for Maternity Benefit, Parent's Benefit and Paternity Benefit.
The time you spend on PUP or being paid through TWSS or EWSS is treated the same as a period of employment.
If you are receiving PUP and have not returned to work before you are due to start your maternity leave, you should ask your GP to complete form MB3 (pdf).
Asking for a review of your payment
If you work and also get a social welfare payment, and your hours or income from work have decreased, you can ask for your payment to be reassessed.
If you lose all of your work, you can apply for PUP.
You can continue to get both Working Family Payment and OneParent Family Payment with your PUP.
If you cannot work because you are sick
If you are ill with COVID19, you can get a special form of enhanced Illness Benefit for COVID19 absences.
You can claim this payment if:
You are diagnosed with COVID19 or
You are suspected of having COVID19 and have been told to selfisolate or restrict your movements by a doctor or the HSE
You must be in employment or selfemployment to qualify.
If you have been told to selfisolate or restrict your movements, you will get Illness Benefit for COVID19 absences for 2 weeks.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID19, you will get up to 10 weeks of the payment.
If you do not qualify for Illness Benefit for COVID19 absences, you may be able to receive Supplementary Welfare Allowance instead.
Illness Benefit for COVID19 absences is paid from the first day of sickness.
If you cannot attend work due to illness that is not COVID19, or if you cannot go to work because you are cocooning, you can apply for standard Illness Benefit.
If your income is a mix of social welfare and pay from employment, you can continue to get your usual social welfare payment if you become sick or have to selfisolate.
If your income is less than the rate of enhanced Illness Benefit you would get, you can apply to have your income topped up to this rate.
This top up will not affect the other payments.
If you work in the civil and public sector, you do not need to apply for Illness Benefit for COVID19 absences as separate leave arrangements are in place.
If you cannot work because you have to look after children
If you cannot go to work because you have to look after your children, your employer may be able to continue to pay you under the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme.
The Government has asked employers to be as flexible as possible in allowing staff time off to look after their children or other members of their families.
If you left work to care for a child or another member of your family, you can get information and advice on the social welfare payments that may be available to you.
Contact your local Citizens Information Centre or the Citizens Information Phone Service on 0761 07 4000.
You can also contact the Department of Social Protection using MyWelfare or call 1890 800 024.
If you plan to take a holiday
If you are getting a jobseeker’s payment or the COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment, you can go on holiday on the island of Ireland (this includes Northern Ireland) for up to 2 weeks and get your payment on your return.
The Government advises that you should not travel abroad except for essential reasons, for example, a bereavement or urgent family business.
If you cannot pay your rent
If you are having difficulty paying rent, you may be able to claim:
Rent Supplement or
Housing Assistance Payment (HAP)
Rent Supplement is a shortterm income support to people in the private rented sector who are finding it difficult to pay their rent.
Rent Supplement means assessments have changed to allow for the higher rates of payments that claimants get with PUP and enhanced Illness Benefit.
This applies for applications lodged between 13 March 2020 and 30 June 2021.
You can read more about how Rent Supplement is assessed.
You may be able to get HAP from your local authority if you are assessed as having a housing need.
You have to apply to your local authority’s housing section to be included on the housing list.
It is based on your means and is paid directly to your private landlord.
Going back to work
If you are returning to work you must close your COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment (PUP) claim.
You can do this is on MyWelfare.ie.
If you are returning to work and your hours have been reduced, you may be entitled to keep or claim another social welfare payment:
Short Time Work Support if you will work 3 days or fewer
Working Family Payment if you have dependent children and will work more than 38 hours per fortnight
Supplementary Welfare Allowance if you work more than 3 days (for example, you work 5 mornings) and are earning less than the basic social welfare rate for your family size
Rent Supplement based on your means
All of the above, except for Short Time Work Support, depend on how much you earn from your employment.
Social welfare options when returning to work are described in more detail in our section on social welfare payments and work.
Collecting your social welfare payment
If you are unable to collect your payment from the post offices due to illness or selfisolation, you can:
Leave your social welfare payment at the post office until you can collect it yourself.
Your payment will be in the post office for at least 20 days after you were first due to collect it.
Nominate a temporary Agent to collect your payment.
You can get a form for appointing a temporary Agent on the An Post website (pdf).
Apply to transfer your payment to your financial institution using form DIR PMT1 (pdf).
Your social welfare payment can be paid directly into your personal account at a bank, building society or at certain credit unions.
You can use your expired Public Services Card for ID when collecting your social welfare payment.
PRSI contributions
If you are getting the COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment or you are being paid under the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme, when you apply for social insurance payments (for example, Maternity Benefit, Adoptive Benefit and the State Pension (Contributory), you will be treated as if you have been paying insurance contributions based on the social insurance class you were paying before you stopped working.
Free Travel Scheme
The National Transport Authority (NTA) has confirmed that all transport operators are now allowing customers with a PSC Free Travel Card to continue to avail of the Free Travel Scheme, even if their card has expired.
Intreo centres
You can find out when Intreo centres and branch offices are open to the public on gov.ie.
You can continue to contact your Intreo centre or Social Welfare Branch Office by phone or email.
If you have coronavirus symptoms or you have been medically required to selfisolate, you should not visit an Intreo Centre or local Social Welfare Branch Office.
Your employment rights during COVID19
This page gives an overview of the protections for employees during COVID19 and the supports you may be entitled to.
If you are worried about returning to work
If your employer has no work for you, or less work than usual
If your employer has closed their business during COVID19 restrictions and sent you home, this is called a temporary layoff.
During lay off you remain an employee even if you are not being paid.
Find out more about layoff and short time working.
Employers can use the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme to help them with some of the costs of paying wages.
This means that workers retain their link with employers and they do not need to personally submit a jobseeker's claim.
If your employer cannot pay you and you have lost all your employment, you should apply for the COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment.
If your employer reduces your hours to 3 days or less per week from your normal fulltime hours, you can apply for a payment called Short Time Work Support which is a form of Jobseeker’s Benefit.
Your employer can also put you on shorttime working which is a more formal procedure and applies where, due to a reduction in the amount of work to be done, either:
Your weekly pay is less than half your normal weekly pay or
The hours you work are reduced to less than half your normal weekly working hours
Annual leave and public holidays during lay off or shorttime working
During lay off or shorttime working, you are still employed by your employer and your contract of employment remains in force.
This means that you are entitled to benefit for any public holidays that occur during the first 13 weeks of lay off.
You do not accrue annual leave during lay off but you are entitled to take annual leave that you accrued before being laid off.
Changes to redundancy rules during COVID19
The law on claiming redundancy from your employer if you have been temporarily laid off, or temporarily put on shorttime work has changed during the COVID19 emergency period.
Normally, if you are laid off or put on shorttime hours, you can claim redundancy from your employer after 4 weeks or more, or 6 weeks in the last 13 weeks.
If you were put on lay off or shorttime hours because of COVID19, you cannot claim redundancy.
This is set out in the Emergency Measures in the Public Interest (COVID19) Act and applies from 13 March 2020.
If you are sick or have been asked to self isolate
If you are showing symptoms of COVID19, you should not go to work.
You should contact your GP for advice.
COVID19 symptoms are explained on the HSE website.
If you are sick with COVID19, you may be entitled to sick pay from your employer.
This depends on your contract of employment.
Your employer does not have to pay you when you cannot come to work because you are sick with COVID19, unless it is part of your contract of employment.
If your employer does not pay you, you should apply for COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit from the Department of Social Protection.
If you have to care for someone
If you are not sick, but you cannot go to work because you have to care for a child or other relative, you can ask for paid leave.
If your employer cannot give you paid leave, you can ask for statutory leave.
Statutory means that the leave is set out in law, for example, your right to parental leave.
Paid compassionate leave
Employers have been asked to be as flexible as possible in assisting employees with care arrangements during the pandemic.
This could include:
Offering paid compassionate leave
Allowing you to work from home
Altering your shifts, so that you can coordinate caring between you and your partner, or another person.
Allowing you to rearrange holidays
Allowing you to take paid time off that you can work back at a later time
Statutory leave
If none of the options above are available to you, and you cannot arrange for paid leave from your employer, you can apply for one of the statutory schemes below.
Force majeure leave (this is paid leave)
Parental leave if you are looking after a child up to the age of 12 (or 16 if the child has a disability)
Parent’s leave if you are caring for a child up to aged 2 who was born after 1 November 2019
You are allowed to take 3 days force majeure leave in a 12month period, or 5 days in a 36 month period.
You can ask your employer to allow you to take the full 5 days paid force majeure leave together.
You normally give your employer 6 weeks’ notice if you want to take parental or parent’s leave, but you can ask your employer to waive this notice period.
Your employer does not have to pay you when you are on parental or parent’s leave.
If you are on parent’s leave you can apply for Parent’s Benefit.
If you are on parental leave, you can apply for meanstested Supplementary Welfare Allowance.
You can read more about the childcare supports for parents in our page on childcare and COVID19.
If you are pregnant
Our page Social welfare payments and COVID19 has information about your social welfare options if you are pregnant and have been laid off or made unemployed.
You can read about pregnancy and coronavirus and you can read information for pregnant women on COVID19 from the National Maternity Hospital in Dublin.
This information is available in 5 languages.
School and COVID19
Children attending school
Your child should not attend school if they are displaying any symptoms of COVID19.
Students at school must keep their physical distance from one another outside of the classroom and work within the classroom in designated groupings or ‘bubbles’.
Schools have introduced:
Increased hand washing and sanitising
Enhanced cleaning regimes
Staggered breaks and lunch times
Rules for children using school transport
Blended learning which mixes learning at school and onlinelearning at home forms part of the school programme so that schools can respond quickly if public health circumstances change.
Schools can arrange classrooms, PE halls and other spaces to maximise school spaces for safe learning.
Schools can manage and redistribute their teaching support resources in order to best meet the learning needs of students with complex medical needs who may not be able to return to school because public health guidelines indicate they are at “very high risk”.
The National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) has developed webinars and wellbeing toolkits for primary and postprimary schools to support the school community in the return to school.
Staying safe at school
Guidance and supports for schools is contained in the Department of Education and Skill’s Reopening our schools: The roadmap for the full return to school.
The roadmap contains detailed guidance and supports covering:
School drop off and collection
Hand washing and hygiene
Face coverings
Maintaining physical distancing
Classrooms, bubbles and pods
Play and break times
School drop off and collection
Many schools have staggered drop off and pick up times.
Students should not gather when they arrive
They should go straight to their small designated group or classroom
Parents and staff should maintain a distance of 2 metres.
Walking and cycling to school is encouraged.
Hand washing and hygiene at school
Staff and students should maintain hand hygiene throughout the school day.
Liquid soap and water is provided in school.
Hand sanitiser can be used, however, young children should not have independent use of alcohol gel containers.
Students and staff should wash hands:
On arrival at school
Before eating or drinking
After using the toilet
After playing outdoors
When their hands are physically dirty
When they cough or sneeze
Moving between classes for postprimary students
Read more on control measures to reopening schools safely on gov.ie.
Face coverings
Children under 13 years are not required to wear face coverings.
Teachers and secondary school students must wear face coverings, when a physical distance of 2 metres cannot be maintained.
All Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) must wear face coverings, or in certain situations clear visors in the class room.
Maintaining physical distancing at school
Primary and special schools
Schools have reconfigured spaces to maximise physical distancing.
The classrooms are clear of unnecessary furniture, shelves and material on the walls.
The following physical distancing measures should be followed:
1 metre distance should be maintained between desks or between individual students
The teacher’s desk should be at least 1 metre (where possible 2 metres) away from a student’s desk
Teachers should avoid close contact at face to face level with students
Teachers should maintain a 2 metre distance in staff rooms and staff groups and should wear a face covering where they cannot maintain distance
Where possible desks should consistently be used by the same staff and children.
The roadmap recognises that younger children are unlikely to maintain physical distancing indoors.
Postprimary
At postprimary schools, schools can take a common sense approach to decreasing the contact between students.
The following physical distancing measures should be followed:
Students and teachers should limit their interaction when moving between class, in hallways and other shared areas
Student’s desks should be 2 metre distance apart but at least 1 metre distance from individual students or staff
Teachers should maintain a 2 metre distance in staff rooms and staff
Classrooms, bubbles and pods
Primary school and special schools
Students may be grouped into class ‘bubbles’ and ‘pods’.
A ‘bubble’ is a class grouping which stays apart from other classes as much as possible.
Your child may be in smaller group or ‘pod’ within the class bubble.
Pods and bubbles help limit close contact and sharing of common facilities between students in different pods and bubbles.
While your child is in a class grouping or bubble they mix only with their own class from arrival at school in the morning until they leave at the end of the school day.
There should be at least 1 metre distance between individual pods within the class bubble and between individuals in the pod, whenever possible.
Students and teachers should be consistently in the same class bubble although this will not be possible at all times.
Each class bubble should have separate breaks and meal times or separate areas at break or meal times.
Post primary schools
In addition to reconfiguring class spaces and maximising physical distancing, schools may:
Review timetables
Reconfigure classes
Consider use of live streaming within the school
Use available spaces within the local community
Students should be assigned to a main class cohort, where possible.
They will remain in the classroom for most subjects, with teachers moving between rooms.
Classes are planned to minimise movement during the day.
If your child has an elective subject they should move quickly to the new class and sit with members of their class cohort, while maintaining physical distance.
All students and staff should avoid sharing educational material or personal items such as pens, pencil cases and notebooks.
Contact areas of devices such as keyboards or tablets should be cleaned regularly.
Staff and students should limit meeting in hallways and shared areas.
Hand to hand greetings and hugs should be discouraged.
Where students need to move within the classroom to perform activities or share a resource it should be organised to minimise students meeting at the same time.
Play and break times
Primary schools and special schools, should have staggered breaks and adjust playtime to:
Reduce crowding at the entrances and exits
Keep students in consistent groups when they play together, where it is not possible to maintain physical distancing
Minimise sharing of equipment
Postprimary schools who operate a canteen should:
Make sure physical distancing is applied
Stagger canteen use and extend serving times to align with class groupings (where possible)
Implement a queue management system
If your child becomes unwell at school
You will be contacted immediately
Your child will be accompanied by a staff member to an isolation area away from other staff and students while maintaining at least 2 metres distance
If the isolation area is not a separate room your child will be kept 2 metres away from others in the room
If it is not possible to maintain 2 metre distance, the staff member caring for your child will wear a face covering.
Your child should avoid touching people or surfaces and use a tissue when they cough or sneeze
Your child will be given a face covering to wear if they are in a common area with other people or while exiting the building
Your child will be assessed to see whether they can immediately go home or be brought home by you.
Public transport should not be used.
If your child is well enough to go home, the school will arrange for them to be taken home by a family member and you will be asked to call your doctor.
If your child is too unwell to go home, school staff will contact 999 or 112 and tell them that your child is suspected of having COVID19
Staff and students must follow the protocol for managing a suspected case of COVID19 in school.
When to keep your child home from school
You should not send your child to school if they have:
Symptoms of COVID19
Been in close contact with someone who has tested positive for COVID19
Been living with someone who is unwell and may have COVID19
An existing breathing condition that has recently got worse
Other symptoms such as sore throat, headaches or diarrhoea
Returned from another country in the last 14 days
You can read more about when to keep your child from school and what to do if your child has symptoms on the HSE website.
Read more about how to restrict your movements and selfisolate.
Curriculum for 2021 school year
The curriculum for the 2021 school year at all school levels will take account of the:
Learning experiences of students during the school closure
Likely gaps in learning
Practical context in which teaching and learning will take place in the new school year
The Department has prepared curriculum guidance for primary and postprimary schools.
Schools will reprioritise certain areas of the curriculum and give greater time and attention to areas such as Social, Personal and Health Education, Physical Education, Language and Mathematics.
Schools can decide how to sequence and pace learning for students following their return to school.
The Government has announced adjustments to certificate examinations in 2021.
The changes are set out in the Department of Education’s Assessment Arrangements for Junior Cycle and Leaving Certificate Examinations 2021 and Returning to School Transition Year 2020/21
You can read more about changes to the Junior Cycle, Leaving Certificate, Leaving Certificate Applied and Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme.
Supporting students with Special Educational Needs (SEN)
Students with special education needs may need support for their wellbeing or planned learning experiences to take account of the effect of school closures on their progress.
Schools got all records of progress for children who attended July Provision to help them support planning for children’s needs.
Supporting students ‘at very high risk’ of COVID19
Schools will provide additional support for students who are ‘very high risk’ and cannot attend school for health reasons related to COVID19.
The plan continues to use 5 levels of restriction that correspond to the severity of COVID19 in a location.
Level 1 is for locations where COVID19 is the least severe and means that restrictions on the activities of people and businesses are at their lowest level.
Level 5 is for locations where COVID19 is most severe and means that restrictions on the activities of people and businesses are at their highest level.
Level 5 is in place now
Every county in Ireland is currently on Level 5.
If you are fully vaccinated, you can meet with another fully vaccinated person indoors.
You are fully vaccinated:
15 days after the second AstraZenaca dose
7 days after the second PfizerBioNtech dose
14 days after the second Moderna dose
Schools and childcare services have fully reopened.
Restrictions on travel to Ireland are in place.
If you travel to Ireland from certain countries you have to pay for mandatory hotel quarantine.
If you have lost your job or been laid off without pay, you can apply for the COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment.
This has been extended until 30 June 2021.
You can read more about level 5 restrictions on gov.ie.
Changes to COVID19 restrictions from 12 April 2021
Some restrictions have changed from 12 April, with further changes expected later in April depending on public health advice.
Two households can meet outdoors, away from their gardens
You can travel within your county or within 20km of your home
Construction work can begin again on residential units, schools and childcare facilities
Training for adult intercounty GAA teams can take place
High performance athletics, approved by Sport Ireland, can resume
Outdoor sport facilities can reopen, including golf courses and tennis courts.
Outdoor visitor attractions can reopen, including zoos and heritage sites but not amusement parks.
Outdoor underage noncontact sports training can start again in pods of up to 15
Funerals can have 25 people in attendance
A further review of restrictions will take place on 4 May 2021 and the following will be considered:
Full reopening of construction activity
Phased return of nonessential retail and outdoor retail, for example: garden centres/nurseries
Restart of personal services (like hairdressers) on a staggered basis
Reopening of museums, galleries and libraries
Restart of religious services on a staggered basis
Level 5
Ireland is currently on Level 5.
You cannot have visitors to your home.
Some people who may be at risk of isolation can nominate another household to mix with.
This is called a support bubble.
You can meet with one other household outside your home (away from your gardens).
You should continue to practice social distancing.
If you are fully vaccinated, you can meet with another fully vaccinated person indoors.
Both people must have been fully vaccinated for 2 weeks.
Only essential workers should travel to work.
You should work from home unless you are providing an essential service and need to be physically present.
In addition:
Schools have fully reopened from 12 April 2021.
Creches and childcare services fully reopened on 29 March 2021.
People over 70 and people who are at very high risk and are not fully vaccinated, are advised to avoid public transport, shop during designated hours and limit their interactions to a small number of people.
Visits to nursing homes are limited to compassionate or critical circumstances only and limited to one visit by one person every 2 weeks.
Two visits per week are allowed if at least 8 out of 10 residents have been fully vaccinated for at least 2 weeks.
Public transport can operate with capacity restricted to 25%.
Domestic travel
You can travel within your county or within 20km of your home.
You should only travel outside of this area if you have a ‘reasonable excuse’ for doing so.
Weddings, organised events and culture
Up to 6 people can attend a wedding.
No organised indoor events should take place.
No organised outdoor events, or sporting fixtures should take place.
Museums, galleries and other cultural attractions must close.
Sports and exercise
Gyms, leisure centres and pools must close.
No indoor or outdoor exercise group activities, including those involving children.
No training or matches should take place except professional elite sports, horseracing and greyhound racing behind closed doors.
Religious services and funerals
Places of worship can remain open for private prayer.
Religious services must be held online.
Up to 10 can attend funerals.
Shops and business
Restaurants, cafes and pubs that serve food can open for take away services only.
Wet pubs remain closed.
Hotels and other accommodation can open only for essential purposes.
All nonessential shops are closed.
Click and collect services are suspended.
All other personal services, such as hairdressers, beauticians and barbers, must close.
Further information:
You can read more about Level 5.
Level 4
You cannot have visitors to your home.
You should not meet socially in other settings.
Tradespeople can continue to go to people's homes, but should wear a face covering and keep their distance.
Only essential workers should go to work.
You should not travel outside your county.
Schools, creches and outdoor play areas remain open with restrictive measures in place.
People over 70 and people who are medically vulnerable should avoid public transport, shop during designated hours and limit their interactions to a small number of people.
Visits to nursing and care homes are limited to one visit by one person per week, except in critical and compassionate circumstances.
Public transport can operate with capacity restricted to 25%.
Weddings, organised events and culture
Up to 6 people can attend a wedding.
No organised indoor events should take place.
Up to 15 can attend organised outdoor events.
Museums, galleries and other cultural attractions must close.
Gyms, leisure centres and swimming pools
Gyms and leisure centres are closed.
No matches should take place, except professional sporting events that can be held behind closed doors.
Religious services and funerals
Religious services are online only.
Places of worship remain open for private prayer.
Up to 25 can attend funerals.
Shops and business
Hotel services are limited to residents.
Only essential shops and services will remain open.
See the full list of essential services
See the full list of essential retailers
You can read more about Level 4.
Level 3
You cannot have visits to your home or garden unless it is for an essential reason, like providing care to a child or to an elderly or vulnerable person.
If you are in a support bubble with another household, you can continue to visit each other.
Tradespeople can continue to go to people's homes, but should wear a face covering and keep their distance.
Up to 6 people from a maximum of 2 households can meet outdoors while maintaining physical distancing.
You should continue to work from home unless it is absolutely necessary to attend in person.
You should not travel outside your county.
Schools, creches and outdoor play areas remain open with restrictive measures in place.
People over 70 and people who are medically vulnerable should avoid public transport, shop during designated hours and limit their interactions to a small number of people.
Visits to nursing and care homes are limited to one visit by one person per week, except for in critical and compassionate circumstances.
Two visits per week are allowed if at least 8 out of 10 residents have been fully vaccinated for at least 2 weeks.
Public transport can operate with capacity restricted to 50%.
Weddings, organised events and culture
Up to 25 people can go to a wedding.
No organised indoor events should take place, except professional sports events that can take place behind closed doors.
Up to 15 can go to organised outdoor events (but not including sporting events).
Museums, galleries, cinemas and other cultural attractions can reopen.
Gyms, leisure centres and swimming pools
Outdoor training sessions can take place in pods of up to 15 people.
Gyms, leisure centres and swimming pools remain open for individual training only.
Bowling alleys, pool halls and arcades should stay closed.
Religious services and funerals
Religious services can take place with restrictions.
Up to 50 people can attend religious services.
Up to 25 mourners can attend funerals.
Shops and business
Bars that serve food, cafes, and restaurants can open, with restrictions.
'Wet' pubs must remain closed, except for take away services.
Nightclubs, casinos and discos remain closed.
Hotel services are limited to residents.
Shops can open, along with hairdressers, beauticians and barbers.
Face coverings must be worn.
You can read more about Level 3.
Level 2
You can have visitors to your home from one other household only.
You can meet socially outdoors in groups of up to 15 people from up to 3 households.
You should continue to work from home if possible.
You can go to work if for essential onsite meetings, inductions and training.
People over 70 and people who are medically vulnerable should avoid public transport, shop during designated hours and limit their interactions to a small number of people.
Apart from protective measures that apply to individual sectors, there are no restrictions on:
Travel within Ireland
Schools and childcare services (protective measures must remain in place)
Outdoor play areas
Nursing and care homes should follow advanced protective measures.
Public transport can operate with capacity reduced to 50%.
Weddings, organised events and culture
Up to 50 people can go to a wedding.
Up to 50 people can go to organised indoor events (including sporting events), or up to 100 in larger venues.
Specific guidance will be developed for individual sectors.
Up to 100 can go to organised outdoor events (including sporting events), or up to 200 can go to outdoor stadiums with a minimum capacity of 5000.
For very large stadiums and outdoor venues, specific guidance will be developed by individual sectors.
Museums, galleries and other cultural attractions can open with social distancing in place.
Maximum numbers depend on the size of the venue.
Gyms, leisure centres and swimming pools
Normal sports training sessions can take place and gyms, leisure centres and swimming pools can open with protective measures.
Religious services and funerals
Up to 50 can go to religious services, including funerals.
If the premises can safely hold more than 50, this may be permitted if protective measures are in place.
Retail and business
Bars, cafes, hotels and restaurants can open with protective measures in place.
Groups should be limited to 6 people from no more than 3 households.
This includes wet pubs, pubs that do not serve food.
Nightclubs, casinos and discos will remain closed.
Shops can open, along with hairdressers, beauticians and barbers.
Face coverings must be worn.
You can read more about Level 2.
Level 1
Level 1 is the lowest level and has the fewest restrictions.
You can have 10 visitors to your home from up to 3 households.
You should continue to work from home if possible.
You can go to work if there is staggered attendance arrangements in place or for specific business requirements.
People over 70 and people who are medically vulnerable should use their judgement on how much they interact with others.
Apart from protective measures that apply to individual sectors, there are no restrictions on:
Travel within Ireland
Schools and childcare services (protective measures must remain in place)
Outdoor play areas
Nursing and care homes
Public transport can operate with reduced capacity.
Weddings, organised events and culture
Up to 50 people can meet outdoors at organised events that are not covered by other specific guidance.
Up to 100 people can go to a wedding.
Up to 100 people can go to organised indoor events (including sporting events), or up to 200 in larger venues.
Specific guidance will be developed for individual sectors.
Up to 200 can go to organised outdoor events (including sporting events), or up to 500 can go top outdoor stadiums with a minimum capacity of 5000.
For very large stadiums and outdoor venues, specific guidance will be developed by individual sectors.
Museums, galleries and other cultural attractions can open with social distancing in place.
Maximum numbers depend on the size of the venue.
Gyms, leisure centres and swimming pools
Normal sports training sessions can take place and gyms, leisure centres and swimming pools can open with protective measures.
Religious services and funerals
Up to 50 can attend religious services including funerals.
If the premises can safely hold more than 50, this may be permitted if protective measures are in place.
Shops and business
Bars, cafes, hotels and restaurants can open with protective measures in place.
This includes wet pubs (pubs that do not serve food).
Nightclubs, casinos and discos remain closed.
Shops can open, along with hairdressers, beauticians and barbers.
Face coverings must be worn.
You can read more about Level 1.
Public health measures for COVID19
Measures currently in place
Support bubbles
Travel restrictions
Emergency legislation
Detentions and penalties
Previous measures
Measures currently in place
The Government has introduced measures to control the spread of COVID19.
You should follow public health advice to protect yourself and others, including advice on social distancing.
On 23 February 2021, the Government introduced a revised plan to manage COVID19 called ‘COVID19 Resilience and Recovery 2021: The Path Ahead’.
The plan continues to set out 5 levels of restrictions.
Level 1 has the fewest restrictions and Level 5 has the most.
The level that applies to each county depends on the current COVID19 situation in that county.
For more information on the different levels see Plan for living with COVID19.
Level 5 is in place now
Level 5 restrictions apply to all counties until 5 April 2021.
Stay at home, except:
For work, education or other essential reasons
To exercise within 5km of your home
Work from home, unless your work is an essential service that cannot be done from home.
You should not visit other households except for essential purposes.
You can meet with people from one other household outdoors when taking exercise.
Schools are closed except for primary level special schools and special classes in mainstream primary and postprimary schools.
From 1 March, all other schools will start to return on a phased basis.
Childcare is closed except for services for vulnerable children and the children of essential workers.
From 8 March, childcare will start to return on a phased basis.
Only essential retail can open.
Bars, cafes and restaurants are closed except for takeaway food and delivery.
Construction work is closed, with some exceptions.
There are restrictions on travel into Ireland and travel abroad.
See further details on Level 5 restrictions.
Support bubbles
Under Level 5 restrictions, you should not have visitors to your home unless they are part of your support bubble.
A support bubble, also called a paired household or an extended household, is when an isolated person from one household has close contact with one other household.
In a support bubble, the 2 households can meet indoors, even though they do not live together.
There are special rules about who can form a support bubble.
You can only form a support bubble if you:
Live alone
Live alone with children under the age of 18
Share parenting or custody arrangements
Live with an adult you provide care for
Live by yourself and have a carer or carers who support you, including a livein carer
If you are an essential worker and you do not have an existing childcare arrangement, you can form a bubble with another household for childcare.
You can form a support bubble with one other household that is not already part of a support bubble.
Travel restrictions
While Ireland is at Level 5, you should not leave your house, except for exercise within 5 km of your home, unless you have a reasonable excuse.
The following list gives examples of reasonable excuses for leaving your home, as set out in Statutory Instrument 701 of 2020, as amended:
Traveling to work if you cannot work from home
Giving care to a vulnerable person or attending to other vital family matters
Shopping at essential retailers
Farming and other agricultural activities
Going to school or bringing your child to school
Going to college where it is necessary to attend in person
Accessing childcare services
Travelling to visit your children as part of an access arrangement, or travelling to allow access to children
Attending a medical or dental appointment, or going to a medical or dental appointment with a vulnerable person or someone you live with
Going to another person’s house if you are in a support bubble with them
Seeking essential medical help for yourself, someone you live with or for a vulnerable person
Donating blood
Going to the vet
Going to a wedding or funeral
Going to court, obeying your bail instructions, attending court offices to initiate emergency legal proceedings
Moving accommodation where it is necessary
Travel to the airport or port to leave Ireland if you normally live in another country
Fleeing domestic abuse or escaping danger
A Garda can give you a fixed charge notice of €100 for travelling without a reasonable excuse.
Mandatory quarantine
By law, you must quarantine when you arrive into Ireland.
It does not apply if your journey starts in Northern Ireland.
Travel abroad
You must only travel abroad if it is essential to do so.
The permitted reasons for travelling abroad are set out in Statutory Instrument 29 of 2021 (pdf).
You can be fined €500 for unnecessary travel abroad.
Emergency legislation
On 20 March 2020, the Health (Preservation and Protection and Other Emergency Measures in the Public Interest) Act 2020 was signed into law.
The Act gives the Minister for Health the power to make regulations to introduce measures to slow down the spread of the virus.
Under this Act, the Minster can make regulations to:
Restrict travel to and from Ireland
Restrict travel within Ireland to stop people moving to and from affected areas
Stop gatherings of people from taking place, and to make organisers of these gatherings put safeguards in place to prevent the virus from spreading
Make businesses (such as shops) put safeguards in place to protect their staff and customers
Close premises, including schools
Laws in place now
The Government continues to issue guidance to help prevent the spread of COVID19.
It has also passed laws that make it an offence to do or not do certain things.
Current restrictions are set out in the Health Act 1947 (Section 31A Temporary Restrictions) (COVID19) (No.
10) Regulations 2020, as amended, which apply until 5 March 2021.
These regulations require all nonessential services and retail outlets to close.
It is an offence to leave your place of residence without a reasonable excuse and you can be fined by a Garda for doing this.
A Garda can also ask you to return to your place of residence if you have left without a reasonable excuse.
Failure to comply with this direction is also an offence.
It is unlawful to host an event in a private home unless it is just for the residents or people in a paired household.
It is also unlawful to go to an event in someone else’s home unless you are part of a paired household.
If you do not comply, it is an offence and you can get a fixed penalty notice or be prosecuted.
Gardaí have the power under the Health (Amendment) Act 2020 to attend at the entrance of any private home where they believe an unlawful gathering is happening and direct any nonresidents to leave it or direct those approaching not to attend.
The following laws apply until 9 June 2021:
You must wear a face covering on public transport unless you have a reasonable excuse for not doing so.
This is set out in the Health Act 1947 (Section 31A – Temporary Restrictions) (COVID19) (Face Coverings on Public Transport) Regulations 2020, extended by Statutory Instrument 512 of 2020 (pdf).
Statutory Instrument 569 of 2020 requires face coverings in taxis and in bus and rail stations.
You must wear a face covering in shops and other premises that are listed in the regulations, unless you have a reasonable excuse for not doing so.
This is set out in Health Act 1947 (Section 31A Temporary Restrictions) (COVID19) (Face Coverings in Certain Premises and Businesses) Regulations 2020, as amended, which was extended by Statutory Instrument 511 of 2020 (pdf).
You must complete a Passenger Locator Form on or before your arrival in Ireland and tell the authorities if your residence details change within 14 days.
This is set out in the Health Act 1947 (Section 31A – Temporary Requirements) (COVID19 Passenger Locator Form) Regulations 2020, as amended.
International travel
You must complete a Passenger Locator Form on or before your arrival in Ireland and tell the authorities if your residence details change within 14 days.
This is set out in the Health Act 1947 (Section 31A – Temporary Requirements) (COVID19 Passenger Locator Form) Regulations 2021.
You must have proof of a negative COVID19 test (PCR) when you arrive in Ireland from anywhere other than Northern Ireland, unless you are in an exempted category.
The test must have been taken no more than 72 hours before you arrived.
When you arrive, you must show your proof and cooperate with the requests of officials.
If you arrive into Ireland without a PCR test result, you must take a test within 36 hours of your arrival.
It is an offence not to take the test and you can be fined up to €2,500 or receive a prison sentence of up to 6 months, or both.
You must quarantine in the place specified on your passenger locator form for 14 days.
You can stop quarantine if you get a negative PCR test, taken no less than 5 days after arrival.
Stricter rules apply if you have arrived from a high risk 'category 2' country.
You must complete the full 14 days of quarantine.
The quarantine obligation applies if you travel to Ireland through Northern Ireland.
It does not apply if your journey starts in Northern Ireland.
If you do not quarantine, you can be fined up to €2,500 or face 6 months in prison, or both.
There are very limited exceptions where you do not have to complete the quarantine.
These include international transport workers and people travelling for urgent medical reasons.
This is set out in Statutory Instrument 44 of 2021 (pdf) which applies until 5 March 2021.
Detentions and penalties
During COVID19, various regulations have given An Garda Síochána additional powers, including arrest without warrant.
Offences are punishable by a fine of up to €2,500, up to six months imprisonment, or a combination of both.
Fines and fixed penalty notices
For certain offences, you can be fined a fixed amount.
A Garda can give you a fixed penalty notice.
If you do not pay it within 28 days, you can be prosecuted in court.
A Garda can issue the following fixed penalties under the Health Act 1947 (Fixed Payment Notice and Dwelling Event Provisions) (COVID19) Regulations 2020, as amended:
Offence Fixed charge
Not wearing a face covering on public transport, without a reasonable excuse €80
Not wearing a face covering in a retail outlet, or other specified premises, without a reasonable excuse €80
Travelling without a reasonable excuse €100
Attending an unlawful social or recreational gathering in a home €150
Organising an unlawful social or recreational gathering in a home €500
Organising a prohibited event that is not in a home €500
Travelling to a port or airport without a reasonable excuse €500
Detention due to health risk
The Health (Preservation and Protection and Other Emergency Measures in the Public Interest) Act 2020 also allows for detention of someone who is a potential source of infection and risk to public health, if it is necessary to slow the spread of COVID19.
You may be detained if you refuse to stay in a specified place like your home or a hospital, or you cannot be isolated in any other way.
If you are detained, you will be tested as soon as possible and you can ask for a review of your detention by an independent person on the grounds you are not a source of infection.
Failure to comply with a detention, or interfering with the detention of a person is a criminal offence.
Previous measures
Measures to delay the spread of the virus taken on 12 March 2020 included closing schools, colleges, childcare facilities and staterun cultural institutions.
Hospital visits were restricted.
Pubs were advised to close.
These measures were extended, along with further measures announced on 24 March 2020.
On 10 April, the measures were extended until 5 May 2020.
On 1 May, it was announced that most of the measures would be further extended to 18 May 2020.
Phase 1 of the roadmap for reopening society and business started on 18 May and lasted until 8 June 2020.
Phase 2 of the roadmap for reopening society and business started on 8 June and lasted until 29 June 2020.
Phase 3 of the roadmap for reopening society and business started on 29 June 2020.
On 15 July 2020, it was announced that Phase 3 would be extended by 3 weeks.
On 4 August 2020, the start of Phase 4 was delayed for a further 3 weeks.
Additional measures were announced on 18 August 2020.
Resilience and Recovery 2020–2021: Plan for Living with COVID19 was published on 15 September 2020.
Level 2 of the plan applied to all counties.
Level 3 was introduced for Dublin from midnight 19 September 2020, for Donegal from midnight 25 September and for all other counties from midnight 6 October 2020.
Cavan, Monaghan and Donegal moved to Level 4 from midnight 15 October 2020.
Every county in Ireland moved to Level 5 from midnight 21 October 2020 until midnight 30 November 2020.
A phased move to Level 3 was introduced on 1 December 2020, with some exceptions in place for the Christmas period.
Nonessential retail, gyms, museums, libraries, cinemas and places of worship reopened.
On 4 December 2020, cafes, restaurants and bars serving food reopened with some restrictions.
From 18 December 2020, you could travel outside your county and up to 3 households could meet indoors as part of the eased restrictions for Christmas.
This was intended to last until 6 January.
However, on 24 December 2020, Level 5 restrictions with some adjustments were introduced.
On 30 December 2020, full Level 5 restrictions were introduced until 5 March 2021.
On 23 February 2021, Level 5 restrictions were extended to 5 April 2021.
Testing for COVID19
To find out if you have COVID19, you must be tested at a special COVID19 test centre or in your home.
Some people may also get a COVID19 test in hospital before they have a hospital procedure.
Who can get tested?
You may be tested for COVID19 if you have developed at least one of these symptoms:
Fever (high temperature)
Cough
Shortness of breath
Loss of taste or smell
You may also be tested if you have been in close contact with a confirmed case (even if you do not have symptoms).
In this case, you will be phoned by a contact tracer who will arrange your appointment for you.
A close contact can be if:
You had facetoface contact within 2 metres of an infected person for more than 15 minutes
You live in the same house or accommodation as an infected person
You sat within 2 seats of an infected person, in any direction, on an airplane
You spent more than 2 hours in a closed space with an infected person, such as an office or a classroom
If you are a close contact, you should restrict your movements for 14 days, even if you receive a negative COVID19 test result.
What to do if you have symptoms of COVID19
If you think you might have COVID19, you should phone your GP.
Do not go to the GP clinic.
If you do not have a GP, you can find a GP in your area.
Your GP will carry out an assessment over the phone.
This assessment is free (including for nonmedical card holders).
If your doctor thinks you need a COVID19 test, they will arrange the test for you.
You will be sent your appointment details by text message (including the exact location and time of your appointment).
If your GP thinks that you do not need a test, you should stay at home until you have had no symptoms for 48 hours.
You should self isolate while waiting for your appointment.
This means that you stay indoors and avoid contact with other people.
The people in your household should restrict their movements.
You can read more about restricted movement and selfisolation.
Getting tested
The test for COVID19 is simple and usually takes about 15 minutes.
If you are medically unable to attend a test centre, you may be tested at home.
If you cannot drive yourself to a test centre, you can ask a family member or friend to drive you.
When you arrive at the test centre, a healthcare worker will:
Confirm your identity and contact details
Give you a face mask to wear
Explain what will happen next
If you are at a drivethru test centre, you will be asked to stay in your car.
A healthcare worker will come to the vehicle and do the test through the window.
The test
You will be asked to blow your nose into a tissue.
This can be thrown into a bin bag provided.
The healthcare worker will then use a swab (similar to a long cotton bud) to take a sample from the back of your throat and nose.
You may feel some discomfort during the swabbing, but it is not painful.
The healthcare worker will send your sample to a lab where it will be tested for COVID19.
Waiting for your results
You should continue to selfisolate while you are waiting for your results.
If you were tested because you are a close contact and do not have symptoms, you should continue to restrict your movements.
You should also make a list of everyone you had close contact with during the 48 hour period before you developed symptoms.
If your results are positive, a ‘contact tracing team’ will ask you for their names and contact details.
Test results
Your test results will be sent to you by text message.
The Health Service Executive (HSE) website explains what your test results mean.
If you had symptoms of COVID19 and do not get a negative test result, you should continue to selfisolate until:
You have had no fever for 5 days and
It has been 10 days since you first developed symptoms (or 14 days if you are in longterm residential care or you recently left hospital after treatment for COVID19)
If you had symptoms of COVID19 and you get a negative test result, you should continue to self isolate until you have not had any symptoms for 48 hours.
You will be tested again 7 days after your last contact with the confirmed case.
If you had to restrict your movements because you recently came to Ireland, you should continue to do so for 14 days, even if you receive a negative COVID19 test result.
You can read more about Returning to Ireland and COVID19 and what to do if you are travelling to Ireland.
If the test results are for a child, you can read about results of a COVID19 test for a child under the age of 13.
Face coverings during COVID19
Wearing a face covering is recommended to help stop the spread of COVID19.
In some situations, wearing a face covering is mandatory, and you could be fined or imprisoned if you refuse to wear one without a reasonable excuse.
You are also strongly recommended to wear a face covering in situations where social distancing is difficult, for example, when visiting people who are cocooning.
This document explains the law on face coverings and gives advice on how to use one safely.
When must I wear a face covering?
Public transport
You must wear a face covering while using public transport.
If you have a reasonable excuse to not wear a face covering, you should tell the driver or inspector.
Read ‘Exceptions’ below for information on reasonable excuses.
Drivers of a public transport vehicle do not have to wear a face covering if they are:
Alone in a compartment
Separated from passengers by a screen
In the vehicle but there are no passengers getting on or off
Shops and other retail settings
Face coverings are mandatory for customers in:
Shops, including pharmacies
Shopping centres
Libraries
Cinemas and cinema complexes
Theatres
Concert halls
Bingo halls
Museums
Nail salons
Hair salons and barbers
Tattoo and piercing parlours
Travel agents and tour operators
Laundries and dry cleaners
Bookmakers
It is also mandatory for retail staff to wear a face covering unless there is a partition or they take all reasonable steps to keep a 2metre distance from others.
You may be asked to remove your face covering to verify your age or identity to staff.
Face coverings are not mandatory in:
Post offices, credit unions or banks
Medical or dental services
Sitin restaurants or cafés
While it is not mandatory to wear a face covering in restaurants, you should wear one when arriving to and leaving your table.
You may be refused entry if you refuse to wear one.
This is for the safety of staff and customers around you.
Fine and penalties
Anyone who does not wear a face covering (or anyone who ignores a request to wear one) without a reasonable excuse may get:
A fine of up to €2,500
Up to 6 months' imprisonment
Both a fine and imprisonment
Face coverings are not recommended for some people, including children under 13.
However, children under 13 may be asked to wear one by a healthcare worker at a doctor’s clinic, hospital or COVID19 testing centre.
Children under 13 should also wear a face covering if they are attending secondary school.
If you have a reasonable excuse to not wear a face covering, you should tell a member of staff.
Reasonable excuses include where you:
Cannot wear a face covering because of a physical or mental illness or a disability, or because it would cause you severe distress
Need to communicate with someone who has difficulties communicating
Remove a face covering to provide care or assistance to a vulnerable person or to provide emergency assistance to someone
Remove a face covering to take medication
Remove a face covering to avoid harm or injury
Members of the Garda Síochána do not have to wear a face covering when performing their duties.
What type of face mask should I use?
A face covering (or barrier mask) is not a medical mask, which should be reserved for healthcare professionals.
It is material (usually cotton or linen) that you wear across your nose and mouth using elastic or string.
You can buy a face covering or make a face covering.
Face coverings or barrier masks are not personal protective equipment (PPE).
They are not intended to protect the wearer against viral infection.
Instead, they may prevent the spread of COVID19 to others.
If you are distributing (or buying) face coverings, you should make sure they are produced in line with National Standards Authority of Ireland (NSAI) specifications.
The specifications include:
Clear use of the words ‘barrier mask’
Name and address of the producer
Any warnings or safety information
Instructions for use
When you wear a face covering, you should continue to:
Wash your hands properly and often
Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze
Keep at least 2 metres from other people
How do I use a face covering?
You should always wash your hands before putting on your face covering (barrier mask).
Avoid touching it while you are wearing it and if you accidently touch the front, wash your hands straight away.
Make sure that the material fully covers your nose and mouth.
You should check that it is tied securely and fits snugly against the side of your face.
Keep your spare face coverings in a clean, waterproof bag (such as a ziplock bag).
You should carry a similar bag for used face coverings.
Label these bags clearly so that you do not mix them up.
If you are a smoker, do not lift up your face covering to smoke.
Instead, remove it completely and place it in your ‘used’ ziplock bag.
When you are removing your face covering, do so using the strings at the back.
Do not touch the front.
If your face covering is disposable, throw it in a bin immediately after use.
If it is reusable, you should wash it in hot water (60 degrees or hotter) with detergent.
Read more about the guidelines for wearing a face covering correctly.
Download posters on the correct use of face coverings in English or Irish.
Services and supports during COVID19
Community Call
Services from An Post
Minding your mental health
Resources for children and teenagers
Resources for people with a disability
Domestic abuse and crisis contacts
Resources for exercising at home
Religious services
This document lists the contact details for services and supports you might need during COVID19.
The HSE has published a list of people who should stay home as much as possible and advice for people at very high risk.
If you are not sure whether you are at very high risk, you should phone your GP.
Community Call
The purpose of Community Call is to coordinate local services and make them easy to access for people who need them.
Local authorities have set up local Community Response Forums in each local authority area.
You can get the contact details for the forum in your area in the list below.
Or you can call 0818 222 024 8am to 8pm, Monday to Sunday.
This number is being managed by the charity Alone which provides support for older or vulnerable people.
What kind of help is available?
Call the national number, or your local authority’s community response number if you need help with:
Shopping for food, fuel and other essential household items
Transport to medical appointments
Delivery of hot meals through local meals on wheels services
Collection of prescribed medicines
If you are not sure who you should call for your particular needs, the national helpline and the numbers listed below will be able to advise you.
Carlow County Council 1800 814 300 covidsupport@carlowcoco.ie
Cavan County Council 1800 300 404 covidsupport@cavancoco.ie
Clare County Council 1800 203 600 covidsupport@clarecoco.ie
Cork City Council 1800 222 226 covidsupport@corkcity.ie
Cork County Council 1800 805 819 covidsupport@corkcoco.ie
Donegal County Council 1800 928 982 covidsupport@donegalcoco.ie
Dublin City Council 01 222 8555 covidsupport@dublincity.ie
Dun Laoghaire Rathdown County Council 01 271 3199 covidsupport@dlrcoco.ie
Fingal County Council 01 890 5000 covidsupport@leitrimcoco.ie
Galway City Council 1800 400 150 covidsupport@galwaycity.ie
Galway County Council 1800 928 894 and 091 509 390 covidsupport@galwaycoco.ie
Kerry County Council 1800 807 009 covidsupport@kerrycoco.ie
Kildare County Council 1800 300 174 covidsupport@kildarecoco.ie
Kilkenny County Council 1800 326 522 covidcommunity@kilkennycoco.ie
Laois County Council 1800 832 010 covidsupport@laoiscoco.ie
Leitrim County Council 1800 852 389 and 071 965 0473 covidsupport@leitrimcoco.ie
Limerick City and County Council 1800 832 005 covidsupport@limerick.ie
Longford County Council 1800 300 122 covidsupport@longfordcoco.ie
Louth County Council 1800 805 817 covidsupport@louthcoco.ie
Mayo County Council 094 906 4660 covidsupport@mayococo.ie
Meath County Council 1800 808 809 covidsupport@meathcoco.ie
Monaghan County Council 1800 804 158 covidsupport@monaghancoco.ie
Offaly County Council 1800 818 181 covidsupport@offalycoco.ie
Roscommon County Council 1800 200 727 covidsupport@roscommoncoco.ie
Sligo County Council 1800 292 765 covidsupport@sligococo.ie
South Dublin County Council 1800 240519 covidsupport@sdublincoco.ie
Tipperary County Council 076 106 5000 covid19@tipperarycoco.ie
Waterford City and County Council 1800 250 185 covidsupport@waterfordcouncil.ie
Westmeath County Council 1800 805 816 covidsupport@westmeathcoco.ie
Wexford County Council 053 919 6000 covidsupport@wexfordcoco.ie
Wicklow County Council 1800 868 399 covidsupport@wicklowcoco.ie
Services from An Post
An Post is providing extra services for older and more vulnerable people.
You can register with An Post to have a postman or postwoman call to your house during their delivery route.
The postal worker can contact the Alone helpline on your behalf if you need help to access local services.
You have to register for this service.
If you have post that you want delivered, you can put a sign in your window that says I HAVE MAIL, and the postman or postwoman will collect it and send it for you free of charge.
An Post also has a newspaper delivery service.
You can get your daily newspaper delivered for no extra charge.
You can register for this service on the An Post website.
You can send cards and letters for free to and from Nursing and Care homes in Ireland through An Post until 31 May 2021.
Minding your mental health
This is a challenging time, and feelings of stress, anxiety and worry are normal.
Your mental health is just as important as your physical health, and it is important you look after it during this time.
If you need to talk to someone urgently, you can call Samaritans at any time for free on 116 123.
While you may not be able to see a counsellor face to face, you can access many mental health services online, over the phone and by text.
Pieta House
If you are suicidal or engaging in selfharm:
Freephone 1800 247 247 (any time, day or night)
Text HELP to 51444 (standard rates apply)
If you need support with your own mood or the mood of a friend or family member:
Freephone 1800 80 48 48 (from 10am to 10pm daily).
Email supportmail@aware.ie for a response within 24 hours.
You can chat with a crisis volunteer:
Supports people with mental health difficulties and their families:
Call 01 541 3715 or email phil@shineonline.ie.
The HSE has a full list of online, phone and text mental health services.
The Parents Centre provides a range of resources and advice on how to look after your children’s mental and emotional wellbeing during the pandemic.
The Department of Education's National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) has also published advice on how to talk to children and young people about COVID19 (pdf).
Guidance and advice on supporting your child’s mental health and wellbeing is also available from the HSE’s Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS).
UNICEF has also issued advice on how to protect your family’s mental health during COVID19.
Bereavement
The Irish Childhood Bereavement Network, in partnership with the Irish Hospice Foundation, has developed specific resources to help parents support a grieving child or young person in these exceptional times.
The Irish Hospice Foundation operates the Bereavement Support Line on 1800 807 077 from 10am – 1pm, Monday to Friday.
The freephone service is for anyone who wants to talk about their experience or to ask questions relating to the death of someone during the COVID19 pandemic, or a previous bereavement.
Barnardos, Ireland children's charity, also provide a children's bereavement service on 01 473 2110, 10am – 12pm, Monday to Thursday.
Barnardos is providing telephone support for parents in response to the challenges posed by COVID19 on 1800 910 123, 10am – 2pm, Monday to Friday.
Parentline is a free, national, confidential helpline that offers parents support, information and guidance on all aspects of being a parent and any parenting issues.
Call 1890 927 277, 10am – 9pm, Monday to Thursday, and 10am – 4pm on Friday.
National Parents Council (NPC) assists parents in supporting childhood learning.
The NPC operates a helpline on 01 887 4477 or email helpline@npc.ie.
One Family provides parenting support and mediation support online and over the phone for people parenting alone.
Call 1890 662 212, 10am – 1pm and 2pm – 3.30pm, Monday to Friday.
It has also published a suite of COVID19 resources for parents.
Treoir provides information and support services for unmarried parents.
It operates a confidential helpline on 01 670 0120, 10am – 4pm, Monday to Friday or email info@treoir.ie.
It also offers a callback service.
Aware provides support services to people living with depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, and anyone concerned about a loved one.
It operates its helpline 10am – 10pm, Monday to Sunday on 1800 80 48 48 or email supportmail@aware.ie.
Shine supports people with mental health difficulties.
Information and support is available from phil@shineonline.ie.
General parenting advice is also available from:
Resources for children and teenagers
The Ombudsman for Children’s Office has put together information on COVID19 for children.
UNICEF has published 6 strategies for teens facing a new (temporary) normal.
The HSE has issued detailed guidance for young people on how to look after your mental health during the pandemic.
Additionally, there are a range of support services available to children and young people throughout the country:
Childline (ISPCC) provides a 24hour national listening service for young people up to the age of 18 on 1800 666 666.
Alternatively, you can text 50101 or chat online from 10am – 4pm every day.
Teenline (ISPCC) is a 24hour national active listening service for children and young people up to the age of 18 on 1800 833 634.
Jigsaw offers mental health support and advice to children and young people aged 12 to 25, and parents or concerned adults.
Spunout.ie provides information and support for young people on many different topics including mental health.
EPIC offers an Advocacy Phone Support Service for children in care and care leavers on Tuesdays and Thursdays, 2pm – 4pm on 01 963 1272.
You can also request a callback from an Advocacy Officer by texting 087 903 6598 or submit an online Advocacy Referral form.
Resources for people with a disability
The Disability Federation of Ireland (DFI) has developed a ‘COVID19 and Disability’ information hub.
People in need of additional guidance or support should contact the DFI at info@disabilityfederation.ie.
AsIAm, the national autism charity and advocacy organisation, has compiled a range of online resources to help people with autism and their families cope with the massive changes caused by COVID19.
Inclusion Ireland has published easy to read information to support people with intellectual disabilities and their families during COVID19.
The HSE has issued detailed guidance on supporting someone with a disability during COVID19.
Support services
People with a disability who require additional support during COVID19 can also contact:
ALONE’s support line for older and vulnerable people, Monday to Friday, 8am – 8pm, on 0818 222 024
Their local authority helpline
Domestic abuse and crisis contacts
Domestic abuse is violence or another form of abuse by a person against another person that they are, or were, in an intimate relationship with.
The abuse may be physical, sexual, psychological, emotional or financial.
Domestic abuse can affect women, men, children and other family members.
If you feel in immediate danger, call 112 or 999 as soon as it is safe to do so.
The Gardaí are specially trained to deal with these situations.
Domestic abuse applications will continue to be given priority in the court system if a protection or interim barring order is needed.
Many organisations have extended and adapted their services during the pandemic due to increased demand for support.
You can access a full list of domestic abuse support services.
The Department of Justice and Equality's 'Still Here' campaign also offers a range of valuable guidance and advice for people suffering domestic abuse during the public health emergency, including information on how to make a safety plan to escape an abusive situation.
You can read more in our document about Family law and COVID19.
If you are concerned about elder abuse, you can call the HSE helpline on 1850 24 1850, 8am – 8pm, Monday to Saturday.
For further information visit the HSE’s website on elder abuse or Safeguarding Ireland.
If you feel in immediate danger, contact the Gardaí.
Resources for exercising at home
If you would like to do some exercise at home, there are many resources to help.
Age & Opportunity broadcasts a series of 15minute seated exercise sessions for older adults online.
You can watch the exercise sessions live on Facebook at 11am on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.
You can also watch previous sessions on YouTube.
Cara Centre has also put together a series of 10minute circuits that can be done at home or in your garden.
The series includes adapted exercises for wheelchair users or people with reduced mobility.
You can access these exercises every week.
Triathlon Ireland has shared a selection of at home workout videos too.
The videos include athome strength sessions and nutrition advice.
You can watch the exercise sessions on YouTube.
You can find more exercise resources on the Sport Ireland website.
Religious services
You can read more about COVID19 restrictions.
Christian denominations
Evangelical Alliance Ireland has an online church service directory of evangelical and nondenominational Christian churches.
If you do not have access to the internet, RTÉ News Now shows mass at 10am every weekday from St Eunan’s and St Columba’s Cathedral, Letterkenny, Co Donegal.
You can watch RTÉ News Now on:
Islam
The Islamic Cultural Centre of Ireland broadcasts prayers live on its website.
You can follow the Islamic Cultural Centre of Ireland on Twitter and Facebook.
Judaism
For details of Jewish prayer services during COVID19, you can phone the Jewish Representative Council of Ireland on (01) 546 1096.
If you want to volunteer in your local community, you can read Government advice for volunteers.
You can also contact your local volunteer service.
You can get the latest updates on COVID19 on gov.ie.
The Government’s ‘In This Together’ campaign provides guidance and information on a range of issues concerning families, with tips on looking after yourself and your family, to advice on staying active and eating healthily.
COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit
If a worker is told to self isolate, restrict their movements or diagnosed with COVID19, they can apply for a COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit payment of €350 per week.
Both employees and selfemployed people can qualify for the COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit.
Workers who live in direct provision who have been diagnosed with COVID19, or who have been advised to selfisolate or restrict their movements, can access the COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit.
If you are ill for another reason or selfisolating because you are medically vulnerable, you should apply for standard Illness Benefit.
COVID19 Enhanced Illness Benefit will remain in place until the end of June 2021.
You can read more about your employment rights during COVID19 restrictions and social welfare payments and COVID19.
You can apply for enhanced Illness Benefit, if you:
Are suspected of having COVID19 and are told by a doctor or the Health Service Executive (HSE) to selfisolate or restrict your movements or
Are diagnosed with COVID19
To qualify for COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit, you must:
Be aged between 18 and 66
Have a medical certificate called a ‘Certificate of incapacity for work’ from a doctor or have a text or letter notification from the HSE to support your application
Be employed in at least one of the 4 weeks before your medical certification and have a current contract of employment, if you are an employee
Have worked immediately before your medical certification and will have reckonable income in the current contribution year, if you are selfemployed
To get the payment, you must have a medical certificate called a ‘Certificate of incapacity for work’ from your own doctor or have a letter or text notification from the HSE telling you that you have been identified as having contact with someone who has COVID19.
If you are diagnosed with COVID19 or if you are medically required to selfisolate, there are no waiting days for payment of enhanced Illness Benefit.
COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit is a temporary measure during the public health emergency.
How long can I get COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit for?
Enhanced Illness Benefit can cover a COVID19 diagnosis (or selfisolation following contract tracing) up to a certain number of weeks.
If you need to self isolate because you may have COVID19, it is paid for a maximum of 2 weeks.
This can be extended for another 2 weeks, if you are told to selfisolate again following contact tracing by the HSE.
However, you will need to apply for this second period of selfisolation on a separate claim form and have medical certification for this second period of selfisolation.
If you have had 2 successive periods of selfisolation, you must return to work and make a PRSI contribution before you can get enhanced Illness Benefit again.
If you are diagnosed with COVID19, it is paid for a maximum of 10 weeks.
If your medical certificate is for fewer than 10 weeks, you will be paid for the duration of your medical certificate.
You should continue to talk with your doctor about your diagnosis and the length of time you are medically certified unfit to work because of COVID19.
Who cannot get COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit?
You do not get COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit if:
You are cocooning because you are medically vulnerable to COVID19, however, you can apply for standard Illness Benefit which can be paid for longer than COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit or
You are selfisolating because you live with a person who is medically vulnerable to COVID19
Other social welfare payments and COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit
You cannot get COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit and COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment at the same time.
If your income is a mixture of both earnings from employment and a social welfare payment and you are required to selfisolate or you are diagnosed with COVID19, you continue to get your social welfare payment.
If your social welfare payment is less than the rate of COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit, you can apply for a top up payment from the Illness Benefit section see 'Apply online' below.
You must meet the criteria for COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit to qualify.
This top up payment will not affect any other social welfare payments that you may be getting from the DSP.
Rate of COVID19 enhanced Illness Benefit
The personal rate of enhanced Illness Benefit is €350 per week.
If you are married, in a civil partnership or cohabiting, you may get an increase in your payment for your spouse or partner.
You may also get an increase in your payment for dependent children.
Apply online
The DSP needs your application for Illness Benefit and your medical certificate to process your application.
You should apply online for enhanced Illness Benefit.
This is the quickest and easiest way to apply.
All you need to apply online is a basic MyGovID account.
Medical certification
Your doctor can complete a medical certificate on your behalf and send this directly to DSP.
If you have been identified during contact tracing as someone who has been in contact with a person with COVID19, you will get a text or a letter from the HSE with an instruction to you to selfisolate.
You can email an image of this HSE document or text the image along with your name and PPS number to illnessenquiry@welfare.ie.
Illness Benefit contact centre
COVID19 business supports
Financial supports
Loans, grants and vouchers
Rates waiver and tax measures
Training and mentoring
A number of supports are available for business owners to help you during the COVID19 pandemic.
On this page we summarise the financial support schemes and other supports to help if your business is unable to operate, you have reduced revenue or you need financial support to help your business operate safely during COVID19.
You can also get advice from your accountant or use the advisory support from your Local Enterprise Office (LEO).
Check if your insurance policy covers you for an interruption of your business, or a temporary business closure, caused by COVID19.
The Government supports and guidance continue to develop as the COVID19 situation changes.
You can get up to date information from the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
Financial supports
The following financial supports are available to businesses and employees affected by the COVID19 pandemic.
Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme
Under the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS), you can get a flatrate subsidy per employee, if your turnover has fallen by 30%.
COVID Restrictions Support Scheme
The COVID Restrictions Support Scheme (CRSS) gives qualifying businesses a cash payment of up to €5,000 a week.
The scheme applies when Level 3 or higher restrictions are in place in line with the Plan for Living with COVID19.
You can apply to Revenue if your business premises are either closed to customers or substantially restricted in operating due to COVID19 restrictions.
Loans, grants and vouchers
A range of other supports for businesses affected by COVID19 are available.
COVID19 Credit Guarantee Scheme
The COVID19 Credit Guarantee Scheme provides loans from €10,000 and €1 million for terms up to five and a half years.
The size of the loan is linked to business turnover (25% of 2019 turnover) or wage costs (double annual wage bill in 2019).
The Scheme is operated by the Strategic Banking Corporation of Ireland (SBCI) through participating lenders.
COVID19 Business Aid Scheme
The new COVID19 Business Aid Scheme (CBAS) provides grants to selfemployed, sole traders, partnerships and companies with a minimum annual turnover of €50,000.
In order to qualify for CBAS, you must be ineligible for CRSS or Fáilte Ireland Business Continuity Scheme and have a reduction in turnover of at least 75%.
You can read the rest of the qualifying criteria.
You can apply online through your local authority.
Applications will open shortly.
COVID19 Business Loans up to €25,000 are available through Microfinance Ireland (MFI).
There are no repayments for the first 6 months and the equivalent 12 months interestfree subject to certain terms and conditions.
The loan terms are typically up to 3 years and there are no fees or charges.
The loan is open to sole traders, partnerships and limited companies with less than 10 fulltime employees and annual turnover of up to €2m.
You can apply through the MFI website or through your Local Enterprise Office.
COVID19 Working Capital Scheme
Loans from €25,000 to €1.5 million are available to SME’s and small MidCap enterprises (defined as businesses with up to 499 employees), who meet the eligibility criteria.
Loans have a maximum interest rate of 4% and the first €500,000 borrowed can be unsecured.
You can apply through the SBCI website.
Trading Online Voucher Scheme
A Trading Online Voucher Scheme worth up to €2,500 is available through to help small and microenterprises get online.
A second voucher of up to €2,500 is also available.
Contact your Local Enterprise Office for more information and application details.
Enterprise Support Grant
If you were getting the COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment (PUP), Jobseeker’s Benefit or Jobseeker’s Allowance and are reopening your business, you may qualify for the Enterprise Support Grant.
The grant, worth up to €1000, is aimed at sole traders who do not pay commercial rates and, therefore, do not qualify for the CRSS or similar restart grants.
To apply, download the COVID19 ESG 1 application form and return it your local Intreo Centre.
Future Growth Loan Scheme
The Future Growth Loan Scheme is available to businesses in Ireland, including those in agriculture and fishing sectors.
Loans are available from €25,000 up to €3,000,000 for terms of between 7 and 10 years.
The loans have a maximum interest rate of 4.5% and the first €500,000 borrowed can be unsecured.
You can get more information on how to apply from the SCBI website.
COVID19 Business Financial Planning Grant
You may be eligible for a Business Financial Planning Grant from Enterprise Ireland of up to €5,000 to help you develop a Business Sustainment Plan and to engage the services of an approved Financial Consultant.
For more information and to apply contact Enterprise Ireland.
Sustaining Enterprise Fund
The Sustaining Enterprise Fund is aimed at firms in the manufacturing and international services sectors with 10 or more employees.
The fund is operated by Enterprise Ireland and provides advances of up to €800,000 which are only repayable when a business returns to good financial health.
The Apprenticeship Incentivisation Scheme provides a €3,000 payment for each new apprentice, to support employers to take on new apprenticeships until the end of June 2021.
You can get more information from Solas about how to apply.
Crossborder companies
If you are a crossborder company, you can get professional advice on COVID19 challenges up to the value of €2,250 from InterTradeIreland’s Emergency Business Solutions.
Under the EMerge programme, you can get €2,800 in consultancy support, to help your business develop online sales and eCommerce solutions.
Help for specific industries
There are specific supports and guidance for different sectors of industry.
You can find up to date details of the key supports and resources in Section 4 of the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment’s Supports for businesses impacted by COVID19 booklet (pdf).
Rates waiver and tax measures
A number of measures are available to help businesses reduce their operational costs.
Waiving of commercial rates
Rates due to local authorities were waived until 31 December 2020.
A commercial rates relief will apply for the first 3 months of 2021 for areas affected by Level 5 restrictions.
There are some exceptions to this, contact your Local Authority for further details.
Reduction of standard rate of VAT
The standard rate of VAT was reduced from 23% to 21%, on 1 September 2020 until 28 February 2021.
The VAT rate for the hospitality and tourism sector decreased from 13.5% to 9% on 1 November 2020 until 31 December 2021.
‘Warehousing’ of tax liabilities
Debts that are warehoused are subject to 0% interest for 12 months.
After this 12month period, a reduced interest rate of 3% a year will apply.
You can get more information on the initiatives covering COVID19 related tax debts in Revenue’s Information Booklet (pdf).
Advice for taxpayers and agents
Revenue has advice for businesses experiencing trading difficulties as a result of COVID19.
This includes information on tax returns, late payment interest, debt enforcement, tax clearance and customs.
Training and mentoring
Skillnet Ireland is running a number of initiatives aimed at helping small businesses through current business challenges.
The ReBound initiative gives small businesses online training and mentoring on implementing the return to work safely protocol.
You can get more information about returning to work safely after COVID19 closures.
The MentorsWork initiative is a free 8week mentoring programme to support business recovery and help you sustain and improve your business.
There are 300 places available and you can apply at mentorswork.ie.
Support is also available from:
Enterprise Ireland
IDA Ireland
Local Enterprise Offices
Údarás na Gaeltachta
The Government supports and guidance continue to develop as the COVID19 situation changes.
You can get up to date information from the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (DETE).
You can get details of the key supports and resources in the Supports for businesses impacted by COVID19 booklet (pdf).
Working from home during COVID19
Employers' duties
Employee responsibilities
Annual leave during COVID19 restrictions
Data protection and cybersecurity when working from home
Eworking and tax relief
Can I continue to work from home when the COVID19 restrictions have been lifted?
Where to get more information
Ireland is on Level 5 restrictions until 31 January 2021.
Under Level 5, only essential workers should travel to work.
You should work from home unless you are providing an essential service and need to be physically present.
The Living with COVID19 plan sets out how we should live and work.
The Plan sets out 5 levels that correspond to the severity of COVID19 in a location.
Different levels can be in place in different locations in the country.
Employers must ensure the safety, health and welfare at work of all their employees.
Employees also have responsibilities when they are working from home.
Employers' duties
Employers have specific duties to ensure the safety, health and welfare at work of all their employees.
These duties include the employee’s workspace if employees work from home.
Managing and conducting all work activities to ensure, as far as reasonably practicable, the safety, health and welfare of employees
Providing safe work that is planned, organised, and maintained
Assessing risks and implementing appropriate control measures
Providing safe equipment including personal protective equipment, where necessary
Giving information, instruction, training and supervision about safety and health to employees
Having plans in place for emergencies
If employees have a disability, are young workers or are pregnant, employers need to ensure that the tasks and working conditions do not adversely affect their health.
You can get more information on sensitive risk groups.
Your employer should check with you to ensure:
You are aware of any specific risks when working from home
The work activity and the temporary workspace are suitable
You have suitable equipment to do the work.
For example, your employer should make sure that the applications and systems you need are installed on your computer
There is a prearranged means of contact
Equipment and your workspace at home
If your employer provides equipment, for example, a laptop, mouse, keyboard and headset it must be in good condition and suitable for the activity.
If you already have suitable equipment at home, it can be used temporarily.
Employers must check that your temporary home workspace is suitable for the work.
This includes things like safe access to the space, essential equipment, that the space is big enough and free of clutter, there is adequate lighting, ventilation, heat, and that electrical sockets, plugs and cords are in good condition.
Employers need to communicate regularly with employees and ensure that employees are taking adequate breaks.
Keep in contact with employees
Give regular updates to each employee
Have emergency contacts and procedures in place
Ensure employees take adequate breaks – see our document on rest periods and breaks.
Even though you are working from home you should have the same access to training and promotion opportunities as comparable colleagues working in the office.
Employee responsibilities
If you are working from home, you have a responsibility to take reasonable care of yourself and other people who may be affected by the work you are doing.
Cooperate with your employer and follow their instructions
Protect yourself and others from harm during the course of your work.
For example, you must take care of your equipment and report any problems immediately to your employer
Report injuries to your employer immediately
Follow any procedures put in place by your employer, for example, around checking in regularly
Agree temporary remote working arrangements with your employer, including regular communication with them
Identify the work to be done at home with your employer
Identify the equipment you need to set up a safe workspace at home and agree this with your employer
Identify a suitable safe space within your home for home working
Agree plans and contacts to be used in the event of an emergency
Ensure you have a suitable workspace – See good positioning at your workstation (pdf)
People working from home may feel reluctant to tell their employer that they are unwell.
It is important to note that if you are feeling unwell the normal sick leave rules still apply.
General tips for working from home
We have summarised general tips to help you look after your health and wellbeing while working from home temporarily during the COVID19 pandemic.
Stick to your normal routine as much as possible, starting your day as you normally would: shower, getting dressed and eating breakfast
Keep times for lunch, dinner as close to normal as you can
When taking breaks resist the temptation to just go and make a coffee and come back to your workspace.
Make the effort to go into another room or out to the garden, if you have one
Log off for your lunch break
If your partner is also working from home, arrange to have breaks together in another room or in the garden, if you have one
Give your eyes a break, for 5 to 10 minutes every hour.
Get up, move around and take your eyes off the screen
Try to limit your social and news media intake
Exercise, stretch and go out for a walk if possible
Make sure you rest and get a good night’s sleep
Restrict the amount of alcohol you consume during the week to help you stay focused
Eat healthy foods even though as it is tempting to increase your intake of snack foods
Do take annual leave even if your travel plans have been cancelled, it may help to take even a portion of the leave planned so you can concentrate on your own health and wellbeing
Keep in touch with your colleagues, pick up the phone or video call colleagues that you would usually spend breaks or lunchtime with and chat to them for a few minutes
Annual leave during COVID19 restrictions
You continue to build up your annual leave when you are working from home and working your usual hours.
You may not want to take annual leave during the COVID19 restrictions as your travel options are limited.
However, employers may not want you to keep all your leave until later in the year.
Your employer may ask you to take some of your leave before a certain date.
The Organisation of Working Time Act 1997 provides that the timing of an employee’s annual leave can be determined by the employer having regard to work requirements.
Under the Act, an employer can require an employee to take annual leave provided they consult with the employee or their trade union at least one month prior to the taking of annual leave.
Employers need to consider the following when deciding on annual leave:
The need for the employee to reconcile work and family responsibilities, and
The opportunities for rest and recreation available to the employee
It should be noted that employees should be left with a proportionate amount of annual leave for the remainder of the year to allow them avail of opportunities for rest and recreation when businesses return back to normal.
Employers are also entitled to refuse annual leave which has already been booked from being cancelled.
Your employer may allow you to carry over annual leave until the next annual leave year.
Data protection and cybersecurity when working from home
The Data Protection Commission has given guidance on protecting personal data when working remotely.
Both employers and employees should ensure that:
Any device used has the necessary updates, such as operating system, software and antivirus updates
Any device is used in a safe location, and that nobody else can view the screen, particularly if working with sensitive personal data
Devices are locked if they are left unattended for any reason and stored carefully when not in use
Effective access controls, such as strong passwords, and, where available, encryption are used to restrict access to the device, and to reduce the risk if a device is stolen or lost
Work email accounts rather than personal ones are used for work related emails involving personal data.
If personal email has to be used, any contents and attachments should be encrypted and personal or confidential data should be avoided in subject lines
Where possible only the organisation’s trusted networks or cloud services are used
Steps are taken to ensure the security and confidentiality of paper records, such as by keeping them locked in a filing cabinet or drawer when not in use and making sure they are not left somewhere where they could be read by others, lost or stolen
The National Cyber Security Centre has published Working From Home Security Advice.
There are certain privacy rules that your employer must follow when monitoring you in the workplace and these rules also apply when you are working from home.
You can get information in our document on surveillance in the workplace.
Eworking and tax relief
If you are working from home, you may be eligible for tax relief on expenses like light, heat, telephone and broadband.
If your employer pays you an allowance towards these expenses, you can get up to €3.20 per day without paying any tax, PRSI or USC on it.
If your employer pays more than €3.20 per day to cover expenses, you pay tax, PRSI and USC as normal on the amount above €3.20.
If your employer does not pay you an allowance for your expenses, you can make a claim for tax relief at the end of the year.
You will get money back from the taxes you paid.
You can read more about Eworking and tax relief.
Should I pay tax on equipment from my employer?
If your employer gives you equipment that you need to do your work, like a computer or printer, and you mainly use it for work, it is not considered a benefit in kind.
This means that you do not have to pay any tax for receiving the equipment from your employer.
Capital Gains Tax
If you use only part of your home for eworking, your home remains your Principal Private Residence and you are not liable for CGT when you sell it.
You can get more information from Revenue.
Can I continue to work from home when the COVID19 restrictions have been lifted?
You do not have a right to work from home.
Your employment rights are primarily set out in your contract of employment.
Some employees may have already written into their contract of employment that they can work from home for a number of hours or days per week.
Those entitlements will remain the same.
Most contracts of employment have a requirement that the employee must appear at a designated place of work.
It is also common for employers to have a right to change the designated place of work.
In those circumstances, employers can insist on you returning to the workplace.
You should talk to your employer first to see if you can continue to work from home.
This will vary between employers.
Your employment rights during the COVID19 restrictions
FAQs for Employers and Employees in relation to HomeWorking on a temporary basis (COVID19) on HSA website
Protecting Personal Data When Working Remotely on the Data Protection Commissioner's website
Changes to your contract of employment
COVID19 and social welfare payments
Health and Safety Authority
Returning to work safely following COVID19 closures and work safely protocols
Planning for return to work
Getting to and from work
Staying safe at work
Where can I make a complaint?
The Government’s Resilience and Recovery 2020 – 2021: Plan for living with COVID19 sets out how we can live and work with COVID19.
The plan sets out 5 levels that correspond to the severity of COVID19 in a location.
Different levels can be in place in different locations in the country.
This document is a summary of the work safely protocol published by the HSA, the HSE, the Department of Health and the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
The protocol describes the steps that employers and employees should take before a workplace reopens to make sure they can return to work safely.
It also covers how businesses should operate after they reopen to reduce the spread of COVID19 in the workplace.
The Health Safety Authority (HSA) will carry out workplace inspections and provide guidance for employers.
If their advice is not implemented, the HSA can shut down the workplace.
The Workplace Relations Commission (WRC) will also carry out inspections and provide guidance to employers.
Both employers and employees should keep up to date with the latest HSE advice and guidance.
You can get more detailed information in the revised Work Safely Protocol (pdf) (Previously called the Return to Work Safely Protocol).
The revised protocol sets out the minimum measures needed in every workplace to manage and prevent the spread of infection.
It gives information on the selection of hand sanitisers, the wearing of face masks, ventilation of workplaces and symptoms.
There may be additional safeguards in different workplaces.
The protocol may change or be updated over time.
Please check back as we will continue to add information to this document as it is updated.
Planning for return to work
All employers must prepare and put systems and controls in place before they reopen their business and workplaces.
Appoint at least one lead worker representative to make sure safety measures are in place and being followed.
A short online course on the role of lead worker representative can be found on the HSA website.
Update business and safety plans, including the business COVID19 Response Plan, the occupational health and safety risk assessment and the safety statement.
Include how to deal with a suspected case of COVID19 in the safety plans and appoint a dedicated manager in charge of dealing with suspected cases.
Develop, consult on, communicate and implement workplace changes or policies.
Provide COVID19 induction training for all staff.
Put in place temperature testing in line with public health advice.
Put in place any mass COVID19 testing needed in line with public health advice.
Pre return to work form
An employer must send out a prereturn to work form to employees before their return to work.
The employee must submit the form before they return to work.
The form will ask employees to confirm they have not had symptoms of COVID19 in the past 14 days, have not been diagnosed or suspected of COVID19 in the past 14 days, have not been in close contact with someone confirmed or suspected of COVID19 in the past 14 days and are not restricting their movements, selfisolating or cocooning.
You can get a return to work form template from the HSA website.
Note: Completed forms should only be kept for as long as necessary by the employer and in line with the advice from the Data Protection Commission.
Getting to and from work
You should travel alone if using your personal car for work or at a maximum travel with one other passenger who should adhere to physical distancing guidelines and a face covering must be worn.
Your employer should give you hand sanitisers and cleaning equipment for your work vehicle.
Walk or cycle where possible.
If you are using public transport, you must wear a face covering.
Businesses should refer to the latest Government advice in relation to essential overseas travel for employees.
Staying safe at work
Employers and employees should work together to help reduce the spread of COVID19 and know the symptoms of COVID19.
The complete list of COVID19 symptoms is available on the HSE Website.
Employer’s responsibilities
Your employer must:
Have appropriate hygiene facilities in place, display posters of good hand washing practices and have proper ventilation for example open doors and windows.
Give tissues as well as bins or bags for employee’s disposal.
Empty bins regularly and provide advice on good respiratory practice, including the safe use, storage and disposal of face masks.
Provide for physical distancing across all work activities of at least 2 metres as much as possible.
(Staggering breaks, or place teams in pods, put in place arrangements for meetings and canteen facilities, put in place a no handshaking policy, no sharing of cups or pens, adapt sign in or sign out systems).
Install physical barriers, such as clear plastic sneeze guards between workers were 2 metre distancing is not possible.
For guidelines on physical distancing in the hospitality sector, see ‘Returning to work in pubs, restaurants and the hospitality sector’ below.
Keep a log of contacts to help with contact tracing.
Have regular cleaning of the workplace and provide hand sanitisers.
An alcohol based sanitiser must have a minimum of 60% alcohol.
See the Work Safely Protocol (pdf) for more details on cleaning and advice on choosing a hand sanitiser.
Provide Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and protective clothing where there is an identified COVID19 exposure risk and in line with public health advice.
You can get more information on PPE from the HSA.
Make sure employees look after their mental health and wellbeing and are aware of any employee assistance programmes.
If an employee has symptoms of COVID19
If an employee has symptoms of the virus during work hours, your employer must have a designated isolation area for employees and must follow a specific procedure:
The designated manager must direct the person to a designated isolation area, along a designated route (make provisions for one or more persons displaying symptoms such as an additional isolation area or have contingency plans in place)
Maintain a 2 metre distance
Provide a face mask for the person presenting with symptoms.
The worker should wear the mask if in a common area with other people or while exiting the premises
Arrange for the employee to stay in isolation before arranging for them to be transported home, or to a medical facility, public transport should not be used.
Arrange for appropriate cleaning of the isolation area and work areas
Carry out a full risk assessment of the incident to see what, if any, further action needs to be taken
Employee’s responsibilities
As an employee, you should:
Follow the public health advice and guidance
Work together with your employer and follow any specific procedures and instructions from your employer to keep safe
Adopt good hygiene practices, such as frequent hand washing, respiratory etiquette and physical distancing
Get professional healthcare advice if you are unwell
Not go to work if you have any symptoms of COVID19
Let your employer know if you believe there are reasons why it is not safe for you to be at work, or if you are concerned that you could be putting a member of your household at risk
Where can I make a complaint?
The role of the Health and Safety Authority is to ensure compliance with Work Safely Protocol.
If an employee feels the workplace is not in compliance with this protocol which includes social distancing guidelines, they can raise their concerns with the HSA and they will address the concerns with their employer.
You can make a complaint using the HSA’s online complaint form.
You should raise your concern with your employer first to give them the opportunity to address the issue.
Both employers and employees can find out when various business can reopen in the Government’s Living with COVID19 plan.
Everyone should stay safe and make themselves aware of the advice in the work safely protocol (pdf).
Employers can get return to work COVID19 templates and checklists from the HSA and COVID19 posters and signs from the HSE.
The HSA also have return to work safely online courses.
The Skillnet Ireland ReBound initiative gives small businesses online training and mentoring on implementing the return to work safely protocol.
Employers can get information on the financial supports and business advice available to help with their cash flow, payroll and longterm investments.
The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment has set up a business support call centre for information on the supports available for businesses affected by COVID19.
You can call 01 631 2002 or email infobusinesssupport@enterprise.gov.ie.
You can also find contact details for the Health and Safety Authority.
You are encouraged to contact the HSA electronically during COVID19 as their staff are working remotely and they have limited access to post.
COVID19: travel overview
The Travel ‘Green List’
Travel abroad
Travel within Ireland
The Government has eased restrictions on travel within Ireland.
You should avoid nonessential travel abroad, apart from travel to countries on the 'Green List'.
If you are coming to Ireland, this document explains the restrictions and conditions you can expect upon your arrival.
Our document Driving and transport during COVID19 has the latest information on:
License renewals
Driving tests
Vehicle registration
Tax and insurance
If you have made plans to travel within Ireland or abroad and want information on your rights if your trip is cancelled, you can read our document Travel plans and COVID19.
Travelling to Ireland
If you plan to travel to Ireland, you should read the latest travel advice from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Passenger Locator Form
If you arrive into Ireland from another country, you must fill in a COVID19 Passenger Locator Form.
This applies to people arriving from a country that is included on the Government’s 'COVID19 green list' and people arriving from a country that is not on the 'COVID19 green list'.
The COVID19 Passenger Locator Form is now an online form.
If you are travelling to Ireland you can complete the form on or before your arrival in Ireland.
The information on the form may be used to contact you to check your location, or to contact you if there is a confirmed or suspected case of COVID19 on your flight or ferry.
If any of the information you provide on the form changes in the next 14 days, you must email passengerlocatorform@plf.ie with updated information.
You may be fined up to €2,500 or imprisoned for up to 6 months, or both if you:
Do not fill in and submit the form to a relevant person
Knowingly provide information that is false or misleading
Do not provide further information when requested
Do not update your residence details if these change within 14 days of your arrival.
You do not have to fill in this form if you are:
Arriving from Northern Ireland
Working in defined essential supply chain roles
A foreign diplomat
A transit passenger who will not be leaving the port or airport
You will only need to fill in part of the form, if you are not staying overnight in the State.
Immigration and employment permits during COVID19
Returning to Ireland and COVID19
Restricting your movement
You should restrict your movements for 14 days after your arrival.
This means you should stay at home and avoid contact with other people and social situations as much as possible.
You do not need to restrict your movements if you are:
Arriving from Northern Ireland
Aircraft crew, including pilots, in Ireland as part of your work
Holder of a Certificate for International Transport Workers, or heavy good vehicle drivers and are in Ireland for work
Ship crew, including the maritime master, in Ireland as part of your work
Arriving from a ‘normal precautions’ listed country (countries on the ‘green list’)
The Travel ‘Green List’
On 21 July 2020, the Government published a ‘green list’ of countries with a similar or lower incidence of COVID19 to that of Ireland.
People entering Ireland from these locations do not have to restrict their movements for 14 days.
The list is intended to act as a guide to where Irish residents may travel safely for essential purposes, such as for essential work or to care for family members.
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFA) travel advice for countries on the ‘green list’ is that you should take ‘normal precautions’.
This means that the country is as safe as Ireland.
The security rating for all other locations remains unchanged at either ‘avoid nonessential travel’ (‘orange’) or to ‘do not travel’ (‘red’).
If you are arriving in Ireland from a country on the Government green list, you should follow public health advice while you are in Ireland.
This means you should:
Keep 2 metres distance from people
Avoid crowded places
Wear a face covering if you are on public transport and when you are in a shop or other indoor space where it is difficult to keep 2 metres distance from other people
Work from home where possible
Wear a face covering when visiting someone who is over 70 or is medically vulnerable to COVID19
If you have symptoms of COVID19, you should selfisolate and contact a GP by telephone.
The green list from 21 September 2020
An update to the green list was published on 17 September 2020 and comes into force on 21 September 2020.
After this, the list will be updated every week until a new EUwide system is agreed.
Ireland will support the European Commission’s proposal to promote a common approach to travel restrictions and movement within the EU/EEA.
The European Commission’s proposal is still being finalised, but is expected to be approved in October 2020.
What happens if the country I am visiting is removed from the Government ‘green list’ while I’m there?
If you travel to a country or territory on the ‘green list’ and the country is removed from the list while you are abroad, you will have to restrict your movements for 14 days to minimise your risk of spreading the virus.
Travel abroad
The Irish Government is currently advising against all nonessential travel abroad, apart from countries included on the Government's 'COVID19 green list' where the advice is to take 'normal precautions'.
If you have booked a trip abroad and want information on your consumer rights, you can read our document Travel plans and COVID19.
Traveling abroad may affect your social welfare payment.
You should also check with your employer whether you will continue to be paid if you have to restrict your movements on upon your return.
Passports
The Passport Service has resumed the processing of online applications for all passport types.
You should expect delays to your application.
The processing of Passport Express applications has also recommenced in Ireland and Northern Ireland.
The turnaround time for processing paper based applications is 68 weeks.
Passport phone lines are now open.
If you urgently need a passport to travel (because of the death or serious illness of a family member, or you need urgent medical treatment abroad), you should contact the Passport Service through webchat.
Travel within Ireland
If you live in Dublin you should not travel to other parts of the country while Dublin is at level 3 of the 'Plan for Living with COVID19', unless you have to travel for work, education or essential purposes.
If you live outside of Dublin, you should avoid travelling to Dublin while it is level 3, unless you have to travel there for work, education or essential purposes.
To encourage people to holiday at home, the Government has introduced a new ‘Stay and Spend Tax Credit’.
The scheme allows you to claim a certain amount of tax back on accommodation, food and nonalcoholic drink purchased between 1 October 2020 and 30 April 2021.
This scheme has now opened.
Travelling to Ireland during COVID19
What are essential reasons for travel?
Prearrival test
Passenger Locator Form
Visas
Who has to quarantine?
Travel restrictions in Ireland
You should not travel to Ireland unless you have an essential reason for your travel.
If you have to travel to Ireland, you must have proof of a negative or ‘not detected’ COVID19 Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RTPCR) test taken within 72 hours of your arrival.
By law, you must quarantine when you arrive into Ireland, unless your journey starts in Northern Ireland.
Mandatory hotel quarantine is in place for arrivals from certain countries – see 'Who has to quarantine?’ below.
What are essential reasons for travel?
You should only travel to Ireland if you have an essential reason for doing so.
Essential family travel does not include social visits, but may include:
Caring for children
Caring for older or vulnerable people, particularly if they live alone
Exercising your legal right of access to a child
Going to a court hearing
Going to a funeral
Essential business travel covers people whose presence in Ireland is critical to the functioning of a business.
Other essential reasons for travel include:
To go to college or school if you have to be there in person
To go with a child or a vulnerable adult to school if they have to be there in person
To go to a medical or dental appointment, or to go to an appointment with someone you live with, or a vulnerable person
To seek essential or urgent medical, health or dental services, or to accompany someone you live with, or a vulnerable person who needs essential treatment
If you have an essential reason to travel to Ireland, you may still have to quarantine.
Prearrival test
Almost all passengers arriving into Ireland must have a negative or ‘not detected’ COVID19 Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RTPCR test) taken no more than 72 hours before your arrival.
Antigen or other test types do not meet the requirements.
If you have been vaccinated against COVID19, you must still have a negative or 'not detected' RTPCR test taken no more than 72 hours before your arrival.
If you arrive at an Irish airport or sea port without proof of a negative or ‘not detected’ COVID19 test, you are committing an offence.
People arriving from any country without a negative or not detected (RTPCR) test taken within 72 hours will have to quarantine at a hotel.
You do not need a COVID test if you are travelling through Ireland and transiting to another country.
This only applies if you do not leave the airport.
Children under 7 do not need COVID19 tests and there are some other exceptions.
You should read the latest travel advice before travelling to Ireland.
Passenger Locator Form
If you arrive into Ireland from another country, including if you are travelling onwards to Northern Ireland, you must fill in an online COVID19 Passenger Locator Form before you arrive.
You must also fill out this form if you arrive in Ireland through Northern Ireland and were overseas in the 14 days before your arrival in Ireland.
The information on the form may be used to contact you to check your location, or to contact you if there is a confirmed or suspected case of COVID19 on your flight or ferry.
If any of the information you provide on the form changes over the next 14 days, you must email passengerlocatorform@plf.ie with your updated information.
You do not have to fill in this form if you are:
Working in defined essential supply chain roles
A foreign diplomat
Failure to complete this form is an offence.
Visas
You should check if you need a visa for travelling to Ireland.
Some nationalities that did not previously need a visa, must now apply for a visa to come to Ireland.
Visa applications are only being processed for essential travel.
Who has to quarantine?
By law, you must quarantine when you arrive into Ireland from abroad.
If you arrive from certain countries, or do not have a notdetected RTPCR test as required, you have to quarantine in a designated hotel.
You must quarantine if you travel to Ireland through Northern Ireland.
Quarantine rules do not apply if your journey starts in Northern Ireland.
There are two types of quarantine:
Quarantine in your home – for all arrivals unless the person is exempt from quarantining, or arriving from a designated country.
Mandatory hotel quarantine – This is for arrivals from certain countries and for anyone who arrives from abroad without a notdetected RTPCR test.
Quarantine in your home or place of residence
You must quarantine for 14 days at the place of residence stated on your Passenger Locator Form.
You can stop quarantining if you get a notdetected RTPCR test, taken 5 days after your arrival or as soon as possible after those 5 days.
You can book a free COVID19 test through a GP.
If you do not have symptoms of COVID19 you can get a free test at a COVID19 walkin test centre.
You must keep the written confirmation of your test result for at least 14 days.
If the country you arrived from is later added to the list of designated countries, (within 14 days of your arrival) you must quarantine at home or in your place of residence for up to 14 days.
You can leave quarantine if you get a negative test after 10 days.
You must quarantine at home or at your place of residence even if you have been fully vaccinated against COVID19.
If you do not quarantine, you are committing an offence.
Mandatory hotel quarantine
Stricter rules apply to arrivals into Ireland from designated countries.
This list is subject to change at short notice.
You must complete the full 14 days of quarantine.
This may be reduced if you get a negative COVID19 test after 10 days.
If you arrive in Ireland from a designated country you must have made a booking to stay at a quarantine hotel.
It is an offence to arrive in Ireland without a quarantine hotel booking if you have been in a designated country at any time in the 14 days before your arrival.
Summary of quarantine measures if you are travelling to Ireland
If I am? Where do I need to quarantine?
Travelling from a designated country You must quarantine in a designated hotel.
You may leave after 10 days if you get a negative or not detected RT PCR test.
Arriving into Ireland without a negative or 'not detected' RTPCR test
You must quarantine in a designated hotel.
You may leave once you get negative or not detected RT PCR test.
You must then follow same rules as a person if arriving from any country not on the designated list (see box below) and quarantine at home for either 14 days or until you have a negative or not detected result from a RTPCR test taken 5 days after arrival.
Arriving into Ireland from any other country (not on designated country list) You must quarantine at home or in your place of residence.
You may stop quarantining after 5 days if you get a negative or notdetected RTPCR test.
Fully vaccinated
You must quarantine at home or in your place of residence.
You may stop quarantining after 5 days if you get a negative or notdetected RTPCR test.
Exceptions from hotel quarantine
You do not have to complete hotel quarantine in some situations.
If you have been fully vaccinated against COVID19 and have documents to prove this.
If you are parents of a new born baby (no more than 28 days old) including a baby born through surrogacy.
Other exceptions to hotel quarantine are:
People travelling to Ireland for urgent medical reasons
People arriving who have a mandatory legal obligation, for example, an arrest warrant or an extradition order
Gardaí or defence forces carrying out their duties
Diplomats or elected representatives carrying out essential functions
Transit passenger who do not leave the port or airport
International transport workers in defined essential supply chain roles
People who have travelled in circumstances where it was impossible for you to secure a RTPCR test result before travelling and you are in possession of written confirmation from the Minister for Foreign Affairs that you have an urgent humanitarian reason for so travelling
Exceptions to quarantine at home
If you travel to Ireland to perform an essential function, you are allowed to leave your place of quarantine temporarily and for as long as you need to do the essential function.
Workers carrying out essential repair, maintenance, construction or safety assurance of critical transport infrastructure, critical utility infrastructure, manufacturing services, information services, or communication services
Workers of international organisations (or people invited by the organisation), who carry out functions needed for the proper functioning of the organisation that cannot be carried out remotely
People with written certification by Sport Ireland related to an internationally important competitive level event
Journalists carrying out their work
Proposed EU COVID19 certificate
The European Commission is proposing to create an EU COVID19 certificate for travel inside the EU.
The proposal is expected to be ready before the summer.
It must be agreed by Member States and the European Parliament.
Travel restrictions in Ireland
The ban on intercounty travel will be lifted on 10 May, 2021.
If you are leaving Ireland to return to where you normally live, you can travel to the airport or port.
Travelling abroad during COVID19
Who can travel abroad?
Before you travel
You should only travel outside Ireland (including to Northern Ireland) if you have an essential reason for doing so.
Currently, most countries have high rates of COVID19 so you should find out what restrictions are in place in the country you are going to.
Travel to Ireland during COVID19
Consumer travel rights during COVID19
Who can travel abroad?
You should only travel abroad if it is essential to do so.
The following are ”reasonable excuses” for travelling to a port or airport for the purposes of travelling abroad as set out in the Health Act 1947 (Section 31A – Temporary Restrictions) COVID19) (No 10)(Amendment)(No 2) Regulations 2021 as amended:
To go to college or school if you have to be there in person
To go with a child or a vulnerable adult to school if they have to be there in person
To work or travel related to your business
To go to a medical or dental appointment, or to go to an appointment with someone you live with, or a vulnerable person
To seek essential medical, health or dental services, or to accompany someone you live with, or a vulnerable person who needs essential treatment
To care for a family member or for other vital family reasons
To go to a funeral
To meet a legal obligation (for example, to appear in court)
To give access to a child to the other parent of the child, or to access a child that you have a right of access to
To leave Ireland if you are not resident in Ireland
A Garda may accept other reasonable excuses that are not on this list.
You should have evidence of the reasons for your travel.
You can be fined €2000 for unnecessary travel abroad.
Proposed EU COVID19 certificate
The European Commission is proposing to create an EU COVID19 Certificate for travel inside the EU.
The proposal is expected to be ready before the summer.
It must be agreed by Member States and the European Parliament.
Before you travel
You should read the latest government advice on travelling abroad before you travel and check the travel advice on your country of destination.
Some countries have closed their borders or may require you to selfisolate or restrict your movements when you arrive.
If you have to travel urgently, you can contact the Passport Office through webchat.
Travel to the EEA
If you are travelling to the EEA (the EU, plus Norway, Iceland and Lichtenstein), you should check the European Centre of Disease Control’s map (EU traffic lights system).
This map is updated weekly by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and categorise regions as green, orange, red or grey depending on their COVID19 rates of infection.
Reopen EU has information about current COVID19 restrictions and laws in EEA countries.
Laws and restrictions may change while you are away (both in the country where you have travelled to and in Ireland), and you should check for new information regularly.
You should bring your European Health Insurance Card with you if you are travelling to the EEA or Switzerland.
Travel outside the EEA
If you are travelling outside the EEA, you should get travel insurance.
If you have a travel insurance policy already, or travel insurance is included in your health insurance policy, you should check that you are covered for hospital treatment for COVID19.
The Irish Government advises against travelling to certain countries.
If you choose to travel to one of these countries, your travel insurance may not apply (unless you can prove your travel was for an essential reason).
Work and social welfare
Going abroad may affect your social welfare payment.
You should also check with your employer whether you will be paid if you have to restrict your movements on your return.
When you return
You should check the latest information on travel restrictions to Ireland before you travel back.
When you arrive back into Ireland you must:
Complete a Passenger Locator Form.
Have a negative or ‘not detected’ COVID19 test (RT PCR test) taken no more than 72 hours before your arrival.
Quarantine in your home for 14 days.
You can stop selfisolating once you get a negative RT PCR test, taken no less than 5 days after arrival.
Stricter advice applies for people arriving back from certain countries, you may have to quarantine at a hotel.
Read more about travelling to Ireland during COVID19.
Family law during COVID19
COVID19 has had a big impact on the lives of families across Ireland.
The Government has introduced measures to control the spread of COVID19.
You should continue to follow advice on how you can protect yourself and others, including advice on social distancing.
This document gives practical information and advice on family law issues during the COVID19 emergency period, including:
Access to children
Maintenance payments
Barring, safety and protection orders
Operation of courts during COVID19
Services and supports available to people at risk of domestic abuse
You can also read about:
Supports for children and parents during COVID19
Childcare and COVID19
Getting married
Access to children
The Law Society of Ireland has published updated guidance on dealing with access issues (pdf) that arise during to COVID19.
The guidance is clear that public health restrictions could not be used as an excuse to ignore a court order and that existing orders should be complied with as much as possible in the circumstances.
However, parents should always make decisions in the best interests of the child involved, particularly if the child has a compromised immune system.
The best outcome for children is for parents to contact each other to set out their concerns and suggest ideas for practical solutions that can be put in place.
Any changes to existing court orders should be documented in a text or email so that there is a written record for future reference.
Family mediation
If matters can still not be agreed, the parties should try mediation.
Mediation is not relationship counselling.
Family mediation is a free service which helps separating couples and parents whose relationship has broken down to negotiate their own agreement.
With mediation you will be helped to make your own decisions that suit your circumstances.
If you decide to go to court it will be a judge who will ultimately make these decisions.
The Family Mediation Service is a service provided by the Legal Aid Board.
It provides facetoface mediation and online mediation through its national network of family law mediation service offices.
Details of how to make an appointment and the contact details of each office are available at legalaidboard.ie.
Family mediation is also available privately.
A mediator may charge in a variety of ways, such as an hourly rate, day rate or flat rate.
Contact details of family law mediation solicitors are available on lawsociety.ie and the Mediator's Institute of Ireland website mii.ie.
Placement of children with relatives and temporary guardianship
You may be concerned about who will look after your children if you become sick.
This might be of particular concern if you are parenting alone.
In many cases, other family members will be able to help.
If there is no obvious standin or where there is an important decision to be made in relation to the child, such as consent to medical treatment, it may be reassuring to have a plan in place.
On 12 May 2020, temporary regulations (pdf) took effect to make it easier and quicker for a child to be placed with a relative by Tusla, the Child and Family Agency.
Tusla must be satisfied that the immediate placement of a child in its care with a relative of the child is in the interests of the child.
These regulations have been amended to apply for a period of 12 months.
Temporary guardianship can be granted by the District Court to allow another adult, known as the nominated person, to care for your child or children when you are seriously unwell or need be hospitalised.
You need to complete a special form to nominate a temporary guardian (pdf), in which you can set out your wishes or any limitations on the temporary guardian.
The nominated person must then apply to the court if you cannot carry out your parental role due to serious illness.
The scope of temporary guardian’s rights will be set out in the District Court’s Order, which will usually be identical to the wishes you set out in the form.
The District Court is currently closed for general case hearings but if your case is urgent it will be heard.
Support organisations for families
One Family, the national support organisation for lone parents, has published a practical guide on managing access during COVID19.
Treoir, the National Federation of Services for Unmarried Parents and their Children, provides information and advice on 01 670 0120, 10am – 4pm, Monday to Friday.
Barnardos has a dedicated telephone and email service to support families through the pandemic.
You can read more supports for children and parents during COVID19.
Maintenance
Parents who pay child maintenance should continue making payments as normal during COVID19.
The Legal Aid Board has published advice on dealing with maintenance issues if you have had a change in employment status or you have reduced income.
You are advised to:
Tell the person who gets the maintenance that you will not be able to pay the agreed amount of maintenance and explain why.
This should be done before the payment is due, if possible.
You should also send a letter to their solicitor (if they have one) explaining your position and include any available evidence that shows a change in your financial circumstances.
You should consult your solicitor for advice, if possible, about an appropriate payment to make in the changed circumstances.
You should tell your expartner (or the parent of your child) as soon as possible how much you intend to pay and try to reach an agreement with them.
If agreement cannot be reached, you should pay what you are advised or believe is the appropriate amount in the circumstances and apply for an order to vary the maintenance as soon as possible.
Applications to vary maintenance should be lodged as soon as possible, for whatever return date is given, so that applications can be made to backdate orders.
Where the person receiving the maintenance is in difficulty, their circumstances should also be considered.
If there are any issues with making mortgage payments and other joint bills, you should communicate (through your solicitor or directly) with your former partner or parent of your child.
Both parties should work together to notify banks or other third parties that there is an issue with payment of bills.
FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) has published advice for people having difficulty paying maintenance during COVID19.
You can call FLAC’s Information line on 1890 350 250 or 01 874 5690, 9.30am – 1pm, Monday to Friday, and 7pm – 9pm on Monday evenings.
OneParent Family Payment and Jobseeker’s Transitional Payment
If you are getting a OneParent Family Payment or Jobseeker’s Transitional Payment and the other parent of your child has reduced or stopped their maintenance payment, you may be entitled to an increase in your payment.
To get an increase, you should contact your local Intreo Centre.
You will need to write a letter stating either the reduced amount, or that you are no longer getting a maintenance payment and provide it to your local Intreo Centre.
Your OneParent Family Payment or Jobseeeker's Transition Payment will be increased for a period of up to 12 weeks.
After that, your payment may be reviewed and your means reassessed.
Law courts
To find out the most up to date information on how the courts are operating or to make an appointment, you can contact the relevant office.
Guidance has been issued on attending court safely and what measures you should take to ensure your safety and the safety of others.
The District Court will continue to deal with some family law and child care cases for the duration of the Level 5 restrictions.
The Circuit and High Courts also continue to deal with urgent cases, particularly those involving allegations of domestic abuse and to process:
New applications for protection orders
New applications for interim barring orders
Applications for emergency barring orders
Extension of care orders and interim care orders and emergency care orders and exceptional or urgent interim care orders
If you cannot afford to ask the court for protection from an abusive spouse or partner or another family member, you can apply for legal aid.
Contact the Legal Aid Board on 1890 615 200, 10am – 12.30pm and 2pm – 4pm, Monday to Friday.
Alternatively you can email your contact details to info@legalaidboard.ie and arrange a callback, or you can make an application for legal aid online.
You can also contact the Legal Aid Board if Tusla has informed you that it intends to apply to the court to take your children into care.
Domestic abuse
Domestic abuse is violence or another form of abuse by a person against another person that they are, or were, in an intimate relationship with.
The abuse may be physical, sexual, psychological, emotional or financial.
Domestic abuse can affect children and other family members.
Rent Supplement and domestic violence
Victims of domestic violence referred from Tuslafunded services, An Garda Síochána and the Health Service Executive (HSE) can get immediate access to Rent Supplement.
The meanstest for Rent Supplement will not apply for 3 months.
Child protection
If a child protection issue emerges during the current health crisis and you have reasonable grounds for concern that a child may have been, is being, or is at risk of being abused or neglected, you should contact Tusla or the Gardaí.
You can report your concern to Tusla in person, by telephone or in writing to the local social work service in the area where the child lives.
Support
Many organisations have extended and adapted their services during COVID19 due to increased demand for support.
You can access a list of domestic abuse support services available or find out what support services are available in each county in Ireland on stillhere.ie.
The ISPCC has a support line and hub for parents and carers as well as its 24hour Childline and Teenline listening services for children and young people up to the age of 18:
The ISPCC support line can be contacted on 01 243 2000, 9am 1pm daily, Monday to Friday
Childline is available 24hours a day on 1800 666 666, by text on 50101 and by live chat
Teenline can be contacted 24hours a day on 1800 833 634
If you are concerned about elder abuse, you can call the HSE helpline on 1850 241 850, 8am 8pm, Monday to Saturday.
If you feel in immediate danger, you should contact the Gardaí.
For further information, see the HSE’s website on elder abuse or visit Safeguarding Ireland.
Safeguarding Ireland has also published guidance about protecting older people from financial abuse during COVID19.
Returning to Ireland and COVID19
Travel to Ireland
Do I need to quarantine?
Income supports
Housing
The COVID19 (coronavirus) pandemic has caused massive global social and economic disruption.
Irish people living abroad have been impacted heavily by the crisis, with many concerned for relatives at home and unclear about their personal futures abroad.
This document aims to give you information on returning to Ireland during the COVID19 pandemic.
It includes practical, uptodate information on travel advice, public health guidelines, employment rights and social welfare entitlements for people returning to Ireland.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFA) is advising against all nonessential travel overseas until further notice.
This includes Great Britain but not Northern Ireland.
For more information, read our COVID19 travel overview.
What to do if you are abroad
If you are due to travel, contact your airline for updates.
Download DFA’s Travelwise app and visit dfa.ie for uptodate travel advice.
DFA advise Irish citizens abroad to follow local public health advice and stay in regular contact with their family and friends.
You can contact your local Irish embassy or consulate and register your contact details with the Department.
DFA’s Consular Assistance Unit in Dublin can also be contacted by calling +353 1 408 2000.
You can also follow DFA on Twitter and Facebook for regular updates.
A number of Irish organisations abroad support Irish emigrants.
Many are continuing to operate by phone and email even if their public offices are closed.
What to do when you return to Ireland
Since Thursday 28 May, anyone arriving in Ireland from another country is required by law to fill in a Covid19 Passenger Locator Form.
This includes people arriving from a country on the 'COVID19 green list' and people arriving from a country not on the 'COVID19 green list'.
You fill in the form online.
Each passenger aged 16 or over should fill in one form.
If you are travelling with children under the age of 16 you should include their details on the form.
They do not have to fill in their own form.
The information on the form may be used to contact you to check your location, or to contact you if there is a confirmed or suspected case of COVID19 on your flight or ferry.
Fill in and submit the form to a relevant person
Provide further information when requested
Update your residence details if these change within 14 days of your arrival
Not knowingly provide information that is false or misleading
There are penalties for not filling in the form or giving accurate details – you may be fined up to €2,500 or imprisoned for up to 6 months, or both.
If any of the information you provide on the form changes in the next 14 days, you must email passengerlocatorform@plf.ie with updated information.
You do not have to fill in the form if you are:
Arriving from Northern Ireland
A transit passenger who will not be leaving the port or airport
Holders of a Certificate for International Transport Workers, or drivers of a heavy goods vehicle who are in Ireland for work
Aircraft crew, including pilots, in Ireland as part of your work
Ship crew, including maritime masters, in Ireland as part of your work
A foreign diplomat
You will only need to fill in part of the form, if you are not staying overnight in the State.
When you arrive, you will also need to restrict your movements for 14 days.
You should avoid using public transport to travel to your final destination and ask a relative or household member to collect you instead.
Read more about restricting your movements in ’Do I need to quarantine?’ below, including exceptions.
Do I need to quarantine?
Most people who arrive in Ireland from another country need to restrict their movements (sometimes called quarantining) for 14 days, including:
Returning Irish emigrants
People with no symptoms
People who have tested negative for the virus in another country
The only people who do not need to restrict their movements are:
People arriving from Northern Ireland
Aircraft crew, including pilots, in Ireland as part of their work
Holders of a Certificate for International Transport Workers, or heavy good vehicle drivers who are in Ireland for work
Ship crew, including the maritime master, in Ireland as part of their work
People arriving from a country on the 'COVID19 green list'
If you are tested for COVID19 during the first 14 days after arriving in Ireland, you must continue to restrict your movements even if you get a negative test result.
During the 14 days, you should stay at home and avoid contact with other people and social situations as much as possible.
You must also avoid:
Using public transport
Visiting others
Meeting people facetoface who are at higher risk from COVID19
Going to the shop, unless you have to (wear a face covering if you do)
What to do if you develop symptoms of COVID19
If you feel ill while you are restricting your movements, you should selfisolate and call a doctor.
Do not go to a doctor’s surgery, pharmacy or hospital.
Your doctor will assess you over the phone.
If they think you need to be tested for COVID19, they will arrange a test.
Selfisolation means staying indoors and completely avoiding contact with other people, including people you live with.
If you live with others, they also need to restrict their movements.
Getting around
As part of Phase 3 of the Government roadmap, you can travel anywhere in the country from 29 June 2020.
Public transport
Public transport services are running but you should only use public transport for essential journeys.
If you have to use public transport, wearing a face covering is mandatory.
Read about using public transport during COVID19.
Driving
The COVID19 pandemic has caused disruption to driving licencing, testing and National Car Test services in Ireland.
You can find out more about this in our document on Driving and Transport during COVID19.
As part of public health measures during COVID19, if you have an Irish driving licence that is due to expire between 1 March and 30 June 2020, your licence is automatically renewed for a further 4 months.
Learner permits that are due to expire between 1 March 2020 and 31 October 2020 are automatically renewed for 4 months.
If you have a valid full foreign driving licence, you can drive on this for up to 12 months while visiting Ireland.
If you plan to stay in Ireland for longer than 12 months, you should apply to convert your foreign driving licence for an Irish licence if you are eligible, or go through the driving test process to get an Irish driving licence.
Importing a vehicle
All vehicles brought into Ireland are subject to Vehicle Registration Tax (VRT) and must be registered.
Vehicle registration inspections are currently suspended due to the public health emergency.
For more information on importing a vehicle to Ireland, including details of VRT exemptions and when VRT testing will resume, read our document on Importing a car into Ireland.
Health information
The HSE provides health information on COVID19, including:
The symptoms and causes of COVID19 (coronavirus)
When to call a doctor
How to protect yourself and others
Groups at increased risk from COVID19 (coronavirus) and what they should do
Pregnancy and coronavirus
If you develop symptoms on your return to Ireland, you need to selfisolate and phone any local GP.
Do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital.
The GP will assess you over the phone.
If they think you need to be tested for coronavirus, they will arrange a test.
The HSE also provides information on minding your mental health during the COVID19 outbreak.
Income supports
Depending on your circumstances, you may need financial assistance when you return to Ireland.
The Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection (DEASP) has a range of social welfare payments to provide financial support.
The quickest way to apply for these is online through MyWelfare.
To do this you will need to create a MyGovID account.
You will also need a Personal Public Service (PPS) number.
PPS numbers
You must have a Personal Public Service (PPS) number to apply for a social welfare payment.
If you have worked in Ireland before you may already have a PPS number.
You can get your PPS number from DEASP’s Client Identity Services:
If you, your partner or your children do not have a PPS number, you can apply for one by email as part of new special measures during the COVID19 outbreak.
You must download and fill out the REG1 form and send it to with a scanned image or photograph of your identity document (passport, driving licence, ID card) and proof of address (utility bill, letter from landlord to PPSN@welfare.ie.
Applying for social welfare
The Returning to Ireland section of our website gives information on how to access social welfare as a returning Irish emigrant.
If you are applying for a social assistance payment, you need to show that Ireland is currently your main place of residence.
This is called the Habitual Residence Condition (HRC).
You do not have to have been living in Ireland for a certain period of time to be considered habitually resident.
You can read more about returning Irish emigrants and the HRC.
Crosscare Migrant Project’s website also has useful FAQs on the HRC and you can also contact them for support if you are having difficulty with your application
People who have lost employment outside Ireland are not eligible for the new COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment upon returning to Ireland because the payment is only for people who have lost employment in Ireland.
They may access other social welfare payments such as Jobseeker’s Allowance and Basic Supplementary Allowance.
Anyone in crisis, or without any income can apply for an Exceptional Needs Payment.
If you are returning from abroad it is important to try to have somewhere to stay on arrival.
The Returning to Ireland section of our website has more housingrelated information and advice for returning emigrants.
The Government has introduced a range of special measures to assist tenants impacted by the COVID19 outbreak.
For more information, see Renting and COVID19.
Any Irish emigrants returning to Ireland who are homeless, at risk of homelessness or in any other crisis situation should contact the local council in the area they are returning to.
The following support organisations may also be able to give you more information and advice by phone or email:
Crosscare Migrant Project is a Dublin based NGO providing information and advocacy support to Irish emigrants and people who have moved to Ireland.
Contact Crosscare here, email migrantproject@crosscare.ie or call +353 (0)1 873 2844.
Safe Home Ireland is an Irish emigrant support service that provides a range of services to more than 2,000 people each year.
Safe Home provides an advice and information service, outreach visits and housing assistance to eligible applicants.
Contact Safe Home Ireland here; email info@safehomeireland.com or call +353 98 36036
Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme
Rules for EWSS
Rates
How to apply
Under the July Jobs Stimulus Package the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS) has replaced the Temporary Wage Subsidy Scheme (TWSS) from 1 September 2020.
It will run until 31 March 2021.
Under the EWSS scheme, employers and new firms in sectors impacted by COVID19 whose turnover has fallen 30% will get a flatrate subsidy per week based on the number of qualifying employees on the payroll, including seasonal staff and new employees.
If an employee has more than one job, each employer can make a claim under the EWSS, ignoring any other employments the employee may have.
The TWSS finished on 31 August 2020 and no new applications can be accepted from that date.
The two schemes ran in parallel from 1 July until the TWSS closed on 31 August 2020.
This page is a summary of the EWSS rules and operation.
You can get more detailed guidance on the operation of the scheme from Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines (pdf).
Rules for EWSS
How do I qualify?
To qualify for the scheme you must:
Have valid tax clearance
Meet the reduction in turnover or customer orders test
Tax clearance
In order to receive the EWSS payments, you must:
Have a valid tax clearance certificate
Continue to maintain tax clearance for the duration of the scheme
You can check your current tax clearance status online through ROS.
More information on tax clearance is available from Revenue.
The July Stimulus Package included measures on ‘warehousing’ or deferral of unpaid VAT and Employers PAYE debt associated with COVID19.
You can get more information on the initiatives covering COVID19 related tax debts in Revenue’s Information Booklet (pdf).
Reduction in turnover or customer orders test
You must selfdeclare to Revenue that you have experienced significant negative economic disruption due to COVID19, with a minimum of 30% decline in turnover or customer orders (between July and December 2020 compared with the same period in 2019).
The review of turnover or orders should look at the period as whole, not individual months.
For new businesses, this is based on a projected forward test.
If you are a registered childcare provider, you do not need to meet the 30% reduction in turnover or customer orders test.
If you have a more complex business structure and need help determining your eligibility for the scheme, you can get further guidance in Appendix I of Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines.
Eligible employees
The scheme is available for employers who keep staff on their payroll during the pandemic.
Temporarily not working or
On reduced hours or reduced pay (or both)
An eligible employer must be paying gross wages between €151.50 and €1,462 gross per week to qualify for EWSS (see Rates below).
If you have a new employee (new hire or a seasonal worker), they can start the EWSS from 1 July 2020.
You can get more information on how to make applications for new hires and seasonal workers in Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines (pdf).
Certain categories of employees are excluded from the EWSS.
Proprietary directors (with the exception of those who keep ‘ordinary’ employees on the payroll – see below)
Connected parties who were not on the payroll and paid at any time between July 2019 and June 2020
Proprietary directors who keep ‘ordinary’ employees on the payroll are being reinstated to the EWSS from 1 September.
Revenue will provide more guidance shortly and this document will be updated when more information becomes available.
You can read additional guidance on eligible employees and excluded categories in Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines.
Applications for EWSS are based on selfassessment principles.
This means you will not have to provide proof of eligibility to Revenue at the registration stage.
Revenue will review eligibility in the future, based on risk criteria see ‘Compliance checks’ below.
You should keep proof of your eligibility for the scheme (evidence of reduction in turnover and other evidence).
You can read detailed information on the supporting proofs in Appendix I of Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines.
Eligibility review
On the last day of every month, you must complete a review to make sure you continue to meet the scheme’s eligibility criteria (looking at the period as a whole rather than on a monthly basis).
If you no longer qualify, you must:
Deregister for EWSS through ROS with effect from the 1st day of the next month
Stop claiming the subsidy
The requirement to do an eligibility review does not apply for July 2020 and the final month of the scheme.
You can get more information on eligibility reviews in Revenue’s EWSS Guidance (pdf).
Compliance checks
Revenue will be contacting employers in the future to check records relating to the operation of the scheme including:
Evidence that you meet the eligibility criteria, specifically the reduction in turnover or customer orders test
Details of monthly eligibility reviews
More information on compliance checks will be made available by Revenue.
Rates
The subsidy amount paid to employers will depend on the gross income of each employee.
EWSS will give a flatrate subsidy to qualifying employers, based on the number of qualifying employees on the payroll.
For every employee paid between €203 and €1,462 gross per week, the subsidy is €203.
For every employee paid between €151.50 and €202.99 gross per week, the subsidy is €151.50.
No subsidy is paid for employees paid less than €151.50 or more than €1,462 gross per week.
Income tax and PRSI deductions
Under the EWSS employers will have to resume the normal requirement to operate PAYE on all payments.
This means you should resume the regular deduction of income tax, USC and employee PRSI from your employees’ pay.
If an employment is eligible for the subsidy, a 0.5% rate of employer’s PRSI will apply.
Backdating of subsidy
The subsidy can be backdated to 1 July in some cases.
New hires or seasonal workers
Employees who were not eligible for TWSS (excluding employees who were not eligible for any subsidy when their income was tapered under the rules for TWSS)
New employers to the EWSS who were not claiming TWSS or were not eligible for TWSS
The payment will be made after 14 September.
You can get more information on backdated payments in Revenue’s EWSS guidance (pdf).
How to apply
From 18 August, you, your agent or payroll provider will be able to register for the EWSS through Revenue’s Online Service (ROS).
Applications will only be processed if you:
Are registered for Employer’s PAYE/PRSI (PREM)
Have a bank account linked to the PREM registration
Have tax clearance
Registration will be through the eRegistration system.
You will have to make a selfdeclaration as part of this process.
You can get detailed instructions on the process you should follow to operate Revenue’s EWSS on your payroll in Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines.
You can get more help from Revenue’s National Employer Helpdesk through the myEnquiries system or by calling the National Employer helpline Tel: 01 738 3638 (Monday to Friday, from 9.00am to 5.00pm).
If you have a question about your situation during the COVID19 emergency period, you can request a call back from the Citizens Information Service.
Coronavirus COVID19
Public Information Booklet
Ireland is operating a delay strategy in line with WHO and ECDC advice
Coronavirus
COVID19 Information
About this guide
This guide explains information about Ireland and Coronavirus (COVID19).
Contents
How is the Government responding to Coronavirus (COVID19)?
What is Coronavirus (COVID19)?
What are the symptoms of Coronavirus (COVID19)?
How can I protect myself from getting Coronavirus (COVID19)?
Who are atrisk groups?
What should I do if I’m feeling unwell?
How should I limit social interaction?
What will I need if I’m told to stay at home?
How should I selfisolate?
Selfisolating Guidelines
Keeping well during selfisolation
Where to go for more information?
How is the Government responding to Coronavirus (COVID19)?
The Government has introduced measures to protect the public by delaying the spread of the virus.
Keep this leaflet in a safe place, follow the guidance and keep up to date with advice at www.hse.ie
What is Coronavirus (COVID19)?
COVID19 is a new illness that can affect your lungs and airways.
It’s caused by a virus called Coronavirus.
Coronavirus (COVID19) is spread in sneeze or cough droplets.
Current evidence suggests that the virus can spread as easily as the flu virus that circulates every winter.
Viruses can be easily spread to other people and you are normally infectious until all your symptoms have gone.
Coronavirus (COVID19) may survive on surfaces if someone who has it coughs or sneezes onto it.
Simple household disinfectants can kill the virus on surfaces.
The evidence so far suggests that:
80% of cases Patients experience mild illness and make a full recovery within a few weeks
14% of cases Patients experience more severe illness
6% of cases Patients experience critical illness
Coronavirus
COVID19 Public Information
What are the symptoms of Coronavirus (COVID19)?
It can take up to 14 days for symptoms to appear.
The most common symptoms are:
Cough
This can be any kind of cough, usually dry but not always
Fever
High temperature over 38 degrees Celsius
Shortness of Breath
Breathing Difficulties
You may display one, some or all of these symptoms.
If you are experiencing worrying symptoms, you should contact your GP OR call HSELive 1850 24 1850.
Coronavirus
COVID19 Information
How can I protect myself from getting Coronavirus (COVID19)?
Wash your hands regularly and avoid touching your face with your hands.
Hand gels with at least 60% alcohol content can be used if soap and water are not available.
How to wash your hands with soap and water
Wet your hands with warm water and apply soap.
Rub your hands together until the soap forms a lather.
Rub the top of your hands, between your fingers and under your fingernails.
Do this for about 20 seconds.
Rinse your hands under running water.
Dry your hands with a clean towel or paper towel.
A video demonstration is available at hse.ie/handhygiene
When coughing and sneezing, cover your mouth and nose with your bent elbow or tissue.
Put used tissues into a closed bin and wash your hands.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces.
Use regular household disinfectants to clean surfaces.
Do not shake hands or make close contact where possible.
We recommend social distancing for all people to decrease the spread of the virus.
Social distance measures work by reducing contact between sick and healthy individuals.
We also recommend that you reduce social interactions to help protect yourself from getting the virus.
Reduce the number of people you meet day to day.
Some of the things you can do include:
Reduce interactions with people outside the workplace and the home
Increase your distance from others – keep separate by at least 1 metre (3ft), ideally at least 2 metres (6ft)
Don’t shake hands
Ideally avoid communal sleeping areas
Avoid crowded places
Work from home if possible
When in crowded settings like public transport or a supermarket, practise personal protective measures by:
Avoiding touching your eyes, nose and mouth AND
Cleaning your hands often
Coronavirus
COVID19 Information
Who are atrisk groups?
There are some groups of people who may be more at risk of serious illness if they catch Coronavirus (COVID19).
These groups include:
People over 75 are particularly vulnerable
All people aged 60 years and over
People (adults and children) with longterm medical conditions including people with cardiac and respiratory conditions
People whose immune system is impaired due to disease or treatment including cancer patients
Patients with any condition that can affect respiratory function (breathing)
Residents of nursing homes and other longstay settings including disability, mental health and older persons services
All over 50year olds within the specialist disability health services
All people in the specialist disability health services with an underlying health problem
Further support for older people
The charity ALONE, in partnership with the Department of Health and HSE, has a Coronavirus (COVID19) support line for older people.
Older people can contact ALONE on 0818 222 024.
What should I do if I’m feeling unwell?
If you are experiencing flulike symptoms like fever and/or cough, you should immediately selfisolate regardless of travel or contact history.
We explain how to selfisolate on page 11.
If you are experiencing these symptoms and are concerned you have been in contact with a person infected with Coronavirus (COVID19), selfisolate and contact your GP (family doctor) by phone.
Do not go to your GP surgery in person.
Your GP will assess you and decide if a test for Coronavirus (COVID19) is necessary.
You can also call HSELive on 1850 24 1850 for further guidance.
How should I limit social interaction?
Limited social interaction is avoiding contact with other people and social situations as much as possible.
You may need to do this if you are a close contact of a confirmed case of Coronavirus (COVID19).
This is to stop other people from getting the virus if you develop symptoms.
If you are told to limit social interaction, you should:
Reduce interactions with people outside the workplace and the home
Increase your distance from others – keep separate by at least 1 metre (3ft), ideally at least 2 metres (6ft)
Don’t shake hands
Ideally avoid communal sleeping areas
Avoid crowded places
Work from home if possible
You can still go outside for walks, runs or cycles on your own.
However, you should avoid spending more than 15 minutes in close contact with other people.
What will I need if I’m told to stay at home?
To help stop the spread of Coronavirus (COVID19) you may be asked to either:
Limit social interactions with other people
Selfisolate
Here are some practical steps you can take now which will be useful if you become unwell:
Alert close family, friends and neighbours over the phone and tell them that you are not feeling well and are unable to receive visitors
Organise in advance to get someone to do shopping for you.
If you are getting something delivered to your home, make sure it is left outside the front door for you to get it rather than bringing people into your home
Make an uptodate list of your medicines.
If you become unwell, this is important information especially if you need treatment from a different doctor than usual
There is no need to order extra medicines over and above normal requirements.
Doing so will reduce supply of medicines for others.
The supply of medicines will continue
If you have symptoms, please do not attend your pharmacy in person.
You can phone your pharmacist if you need to order a prescription.
If you need to collect prescription or nonprescription medicines, ask a family member or friend to do so.
How should I selfisolate?
Selfisolation means staying indoors and completely avoiding contact with other people.
You may need to do this if you have symptoms of Coronavirus (COVID19).
This is to stop other people from getting it.
If you have symptoms then you MUST selfisolate and contact your GP by phone.
If they think you need to get tested for the virus, they will organise this.
While you wait for the test results or if you test positive but have mild symptoms, you can selfisolate at home.
Selfisolating Guidelines
The following guidelines 1–10 should be followed by people who have to selfisolate due to Coronavirus (COVID19).
Stay at home
Do not go to work, college, school, religious services, social gatherings or public areas.
Do not use public transport or taxis until you are well.
2 Keep away from other people in your home as much as you can
Avoid physical contact with other people in your household.
Stay in a room with the window open.
If possible, you should use a separate toilet and bathroom to the rest of the household.
If this is not possible, make sure these areas are kept clean.
Wash your hands often
Keep your hands clean by washing them regularly with soap and water.
This is one of the most important things you can do.
Cover your coughs and sneezes
When coughing and sneezing, cover your mouth and nose with your bent elbow or tissue.
Put used tissues into a closed bin and wash your hands.
Avoid sharing things
You should avoid sharing dishes, drinking glasses, cups, eating utensils, towels, bedding or other items with other people in your home.
After you use these items, they should be washed in a dishwasher or alternatively with soap and hot water.
Don’t share games consoles or remote controls.
Self isolating Guidelines Continued
Monitor your symptoms
If your symptoms develop or get worse, phone your GP.
If it is an emergency, call an ambulance on 112 or 999 and tell them that you may have Coronavirus (COVID19).
Avoid having visitors in your home
If possible, do not allow visitors into your home or answer your door to callers.
Household cleaning
Many cleaning and disinfectant products sold in supermarkets can kill Coronavirus (COVID19) on surfaces.
Clean the surface as usual with a detergent, disinfectant or disinfectant wipe.
Wear disposable gloves and a plastic apron if available and throw them out afterwards.
Wash your hands after removing gloves and apron.
Laundry
Wear gloves while handling dirty laundry and wash with detergent at a temperature above 60 degrees Celsius or at the highest temperature suitable for the fabric (whichever is higher).
Rubbish
Use plastic bags for collecting rubbish including used tissues, gloves, masks and aprons.
Dispose of rubbish bags when threequarters full by tying the bag.
Place the first bag in a second bag, which you should then also tie.
Keeping well during selfisolation
Infectious disease outbreaks, like the current Coronavirus (COVID19), can be worrying and can affect your mental health.
While you may be anxious, there are many things you can do to support and manage your mental health during such times.
Keep yourself mobile by getting up and moving around as much as possible.
If you have a garden or backyard go out and get some fresh air, but keep more than 2 metres away from other people.
Selfisolation can be boring or frustrating.
It may affect your mood and feelings.
You may feel low, worried or have problems sleeping.
You may find it helps to stay in touch with friends or relatives by phone or on social media.
See yourmentalhealth.ie for more advice.
Where to go for more information?
If you need more information, please go to
﻿Your COVID19 vaccine
If you’ve got questions about your vaccine, there are answers you can trust at www.hse.ie
The HSE is rolling out COVID19 vaccines across Ireland, bringing hope to our communities and offering us protection from COVID19.
We’re already seeing reduced illness and fewer deaths among groups who are vaccinated.
Getting your vaccine protects you, once you allow time for your vaccine to work.
When groups of people are vaccinated, this can protect the people around you too.
This booklet tells you what you need to know about getting your COVID19 vaccine.
how COVID19 spreads and its symptoms
how to register for your vaccine
about how your vaccine protects you
about developing and approving vaccines
what to expect at a HSE vaccination centre
how long your vaccine takes to work and what you can do after it
Over the coming weeks and months, everyone in Ireland who is eligible will be able to receive a free COVID19 vaccine from the HSE.
This should offer us more options for safely returning to our health and social care services, to our education, spending time with loved ones, and reopening our society.
Because the more people who are protected from COVID19, the better things will be for us all.
How COVID19 spreads and its symptoms
COVID19 is an illness that can affect your lungs and airways, and sometimes other parts of your body.
It’s caused by a virus called SARSCoV2, a type of coronavirus.
It’s highly infectious.
The most common way you can get COVID19 is by coming into close contact with someone who has the virus.
You can spread the virus even if you do not have symptoms.
It’s mainly spread through close contact and droplets that come from your nose and mouth.
For example, from someone who is talking loudly, singing, shouting, coughing or sneezing.
This happens when people are within 1 to 2 metres of each other.
COVID19 can also spread easily in crowded or poorly ventilated areas.
You can get the virus from infected surfaces too.
Because I have a health condition, getting the vaccine meant the world to me after a stressful and sometimes scary year of living through a pandemic.
This past year has been tough.
I was lucky to be able to work from home.
But I still spent the year worrying about myself, my family and my friends.
I have never felt so excited to visit my GP as I did when I went to receive my first dose.
It felt like a light at the end of a very long tunnel.
Common symptoms
a fever (high temperature of 38 degrees Celsius or above)
a new cough this can be any kind of cough, not just dry
shortness of breath or breathing difficulties
loss or change to your sense of smell or taste
COVID19 can cause anyone, at any age, serious illness, hospitalisation and even death.
Pregnant women, people with certain health conditions and older people have a higher risk of getting seriously ill if they get COVID19.
If you have any symptoms of COVID19, selfisolate (stay in your room) and phone a GP (doctor).
Your GP can arrange a COVID19 test for you.
Your test and GP assessment are free of charge.
For factual, expert information you can trust on COVID19, please visit www.hse.ie/coronavirus or call HSELive on 1850 24 1850.
How COVID19 vaccines protect you
COVID19 vaccines offer you protection from COVID19.
Vaccines teach your immune system how to protect you from diseases.
All vaccines do this, but different types of vaccine work in different ways.
The surface of the virus that causes COVID19 is studded with spikes.
These spikes allow the virus to attach to the cells of your body.
They’re important in how the vaccines can help protect you.
When you get your vaccine, it triggers an immune response that tells your body to make antibodies.
While your vaccine doesn’t stay in your body for very long, the antibodies stay and stop virus spikes from attaching to your cells.
After your body has time to produce these antibodies, you’re less likely to get sick with COVID19.
You’re much less likely to get seriously ill or need to go to hospital.
It’s much safer to get immunity through your vaccination, than by getting COVID19.
While it’s up to you to decide to get the vaccine, the HSE, the World Health Organization and the Department of Health strongly recommend that you do so, as soon as it’s offered to you.
Number of doses
For most COVID19 vaccines, people need 2 doses, at separate times, to get longer lasting protection.
There are also vaccines that are given in 1 dose.
If you had COVID19 in the last 6 months, you only need 1 dose of a vaccine.
Breastfeeding and pregnancy
You can get the COVID19 vaccine if you’re breastfeeding.
If you’re pregnant, talk to your obstetrician or GP about getting your COVID19 vaccine.
More information is available at www.hse.ie/covidvacpreg
If you already had COVID19
Your vaccine reduces your risk of getting COVID19 again.
It can reduce the seriousness of your symptoms if you do.
Your vaccine cannot give you COVID19
If you get COVID19 soon after your vaccination, it’s possible you caught it before your appointment.
Registering when it’s your turn
Look out for when you can register
The HSE will let you know when it’s your turn to register through www.hse.ie, news or public advertising.
Most people need to register online at www.hse.ie to get their free COVID19 vaccine at a HSE vaccination centre.
Some people are vaccinated elsewhere, like at their GP or local pharmacy.
Please do not register until it’s your turn.
Check what you need to register online
To register online, you need:
a mobile phone number
an email address
your Personal Public Service (PPS) number
your Eircode
Text message is the main way the HSE communicates with you about your vaccination.
If you do not have all of these, you can still register.
Call the COVID19 helpline on 1850 24 1850 to register by phone instead.
You can use a smartphone, tablet or computer to register online.
If you do not have one of these, call the helpline to register.
Register online
When it’s your turn, visit vaccine.hse.ie to register.
Click ‘Start now’ and choose your group
at busy times, there may be a queue.
Create your account you will receive a verification email.
Click on the link in the verification email you then get a verification text (SMS).
Enter the verification code from the text and create a password.
Enter your personal details read why the HSE asks for this information at www.hse.ie
Check your details and click ‘Finish’ to complete your registration.
For help with registering yourself or someone else online, visit www.hse.ie
Wait for your appointment text
You do not get your appointment immediately.
It could be a few weeks after you register.
You will get a text 3 to 7 days before your appointment.
This tells you the date, time, HSE vaccination centre to go to and which vaccine you’re getting.
If you need to, you can request a new appointment by following the instructions in your appointment text.
The HSE may send you text messages with any other updates you need to know.
Development and approval of vaccines
The HSE only uses COVID19 vaccines that the European Medicines Agency (EMA) has approved.
While COVID19 vaccine development moved fast, the vaccines have gone through the same steps as all licensed medicines.
This included:
pharmaceutical quality checks
nonclinical trials
three phases of clinical trials with tens of thousands of people The EMA then scientifically evaluated and authorised the COVID19 vaccines for use in Europe.
More information on how COVID19 vaccines are approved is available at www.ema.europa.eu
Speed of development
There are a few reasons why vaccines were developed quickly.
There was huge global investment into researching and developing the vaccines.
A lot of people had COVID19 when they were developed, so scientists could learn quickly that they’re effective.
Manufacturers started to make the vaccines, so they were ready to go if approved.
Effectiveness
Worldwide, vaccines save at least 2 to 3 million lives each year, and protect many more from lifelong illnesses.
Millions of people have received COVID19 vaccines all over the world.
There’s strong, reliable evidence that COVID19 vaccines greatly reduce your risk of getting COVID19.
They’re highly effective at preventing deaths and serious illness from COVID19.
In Ireland alone, we’re already seeing reduced illness and fewer deaths among people who are vaccinated.
Monitoring
In Ireland, the Health Products Regulatory Authority (HPRA) regulates medicines.
It monitors the safety and effectiveness of COVID19 vaccines after they’re approved for use.
You can find out more at www.hpra.ie
Side effects
Like all medicines, vaccines can cause side effects.
Most of these are mild to moderate, shortterm, and not everyone gets them.
When you’re getting vaccinated, the HSE gives you a detailed leaflet with information about possible side effects of your vaccine.
The vaccines are new and information about longterm side effects is limited.
As with all vaccines, you can report suspected side effects to the Health Products Regulatory Authority (HPRA) at www.hpra.ie/report As more people get vaccinated, more information becomes available.
The HSE regularly updates both www.hse.ie and its vaccine information leaflets.
At the HSE vaccination centre
Arrive at the HSE vaccination centre
Appointments take about 30 minutes and are well spaced out at these large venues.
Your appointment is at your nearest available HSE vaccination centre.
When you arrive, follow the signs or instructions from the stewards.
Information about parking and site facilities is available at www.hse.ie/covidvaccinationcentres
Checkin at reception
The receptionist takes your details and confirms your ID.
If you registered without a PPS number, you need proof of address.
You get a HSE vaccine information leaflet and the manufacturer’s leaflet.
Remember, vaccination is by appointment only.
Check what ID and proof of address you need at www.hse.ie
My vaccination day checklist
If I have COVID19 symptoms, selfisolate, phone my GP and request a new appointment.
Bring appointment information, face covering, ID and, if needed, proof of address.
Go alone, if possible, and arrive on time.
Ask a family member or friend to help me get there or get around, if needed.
Wear a shortsleeved tshirt or sleeves I can roll up.
Move to a vaccination booth
A trained vaccinator can answer any questions you have.
They check that you’re okay to get your vaccine and confirm your consent to be vaccinated.
The vaccinator gives you the COVID19 vaccine as an injection in your upper arm.
It only takes a few minutes.
You then receive an aftercare advice leaflet.
They also give you a vaccine record card with the name and batch number of your vaccine.
Go to the observation area before you leave
Stay here for at least 15 minutes.
There’s someone here to make sure you’re feeling well.
Unless you’re asked to stay longer, you can then leave the HSE vaccination centre.
After your vaccine, it’s okay to drive as long as you’re feeling okay.
If you need a second dose, you get a text message with another appointment.
The time between your appointments can vary.
Thank you for protecting yourself and others.
When you’re vaccine protected
Getting your COVID19 vaccine reduces your risk of getting COVID19 and protects you from serious complications of the illness.
In the future, you’ll also have access to a digital vaccination certificate that proves you have received your vaccine in Ireland, should you need it.
When you have allowed time for your vaccine to work, some activities with other people are much safer than before you had vaccine protection.
This is sometimes known as your vaccine bonus or vaccine dividend.
Meeting others after your vaccine
Once your vaccine has had time to work, you’re considered vaccine protected.
You can meet indoors with:
vaccine protected people from up to 2 other households
people who are not vaccinated from 1 other household as long as no one from that household is at high risk from COVID19
You can do this without wearing face coverings or staying 2 metres apart.
Residents of longterm care facilities
If at least 8 out of 10 residents are vaccine protected, you can have:
up to 4 visits per week with up to 2 people per visit
If you and your visitor are both vaccine protected, you do not need to wear face coverings or stay 2 metres apart when you’re alone together in a room or car.
Close contacts
If you’re a vaccine protected close contact of a person who tests positive for COVID19, you do not need to:
restrict your movements (stay at home) for 14 days
be tested for COVID19
If you’re immunocompromised, the contact tracing team will advise you what you need to do.
Your vaccine takes time to work
After your vaccine, wait until it has time to work before following the vaccine bonus advice.
Pfizer / BioNTech 7 days after 2nd dose
Moderna 14 days after 2nd dose
AstraZeneca 28 days after 1st dose you still need to get your 2nd dose
Janssen 14 days after single dose
If you had COVID19 in the last 6 months, confirmed with a laboratory test, you can also follow the vaccine bonus advice unless you’re aged 65 or older or you’re immunocompromised.
Keep protecting yourself and others after your vaccine
As you begin to socialise more and meet up with people who you have not seen for a long time, you should still be careful.
Remember, lots of people have not yet been vaccinated.
This means that you still need to keep 2 metres from others, wear a face covering and wash your hands regularly.
You should also avoid crowds, poorly ventilated spaces and meeting people who are restricting their movements or selfisolating.
This helps to protect you and everyone else, even when you’re vaccine protected.
As more and more people are vaccinated, pay attention to the public health advice that’s relevant to you.
Find factual, expert advice you can trust at www.hse.ie
It’s hard to describe how uplifting the days we’re vaccinating are, both for those coming in and for all of our team.
Many of our older patients, and those with chronic medical conditions, have had to give up so much.
Many have had no face to face contact with friends or family, or have not even felt safe going to the local shop for milk.
We’re so proud to help them get back to enjoying their life to the full.
Now that almost all of our over 70s are vaccine protected, it’s lovely to hear them making plans catching up with their friends, getting their hair done or simply hugging their grandchildren.
Most people are aware of the dangers posed by COVID19 and the overwhelming scientific evidence in favour of vaccination.
There have been some questions about side effects.
But in the end, having listened to all of the evidence, most decided to proceed.
At the end of the day, it’s a personal choice.
Your GP or another health professional caring for you can answer any questions you have, so that you’re ready when it’s offered to you.
Keep well
This is still a hard time for us all, and there are things that you can do to help yourself feel healthy and well.
Keep active and go outdoors now that summer is here, and stay in touch or make new plans to connect with a friend or family member.
Enjoy healthy foods, and try to get enough sleep.
Mind your mood, doing small, simple things every day that feel good.
If you need more support, the HSE’s www.yourmentalhealth.ie is a good place to start.
There are lots more tips and ideas on keeping well at www.gov.ie/healthyireland
﻿Covid19 Vaccine
Important Information about the AstraZeneca vaccine, Vaxzevria
This leaflet tells you about the COVID19 (coronavirus) vaccine.
what COVID19 is
what the COVID19 vaccine is
who should get the vaccine
why it is important to get the vaccine
who should not get it and who should delay getting it
vaccine safety and side effects
where you can get more information
Please read this leaflet carefully.
You can also talk to a healthcare professional, like your GP (Doctor) or Pharmacist, about the vaccine.
What is COVID19?
COVID19 is an illness that can affect your lungs and airways, and sometimes other parts of your body.
It’s caused by a virus called coronavirus.
COVID19 is highly infectious.
It spreads through the air through droplets produced when people cough or sneeze, or when they touch surfaces where the droplets have landed and then touch their eyes, nose or mouth.
COVID19 can cause serious illness, hospitalisation and even death.
Common symptoms of COVID19 include:
a fever (high temperature of 38 degrees Celsius or above)
a new cough – this can be any kind of cough, not just dry
shortness of breath or breathing difficulties
loss or change to your sense of smell or taste – this means you’ve noticed you cannot smell or taste anything, or they smell or taste differently
You may not have all of these symptoms or you may just feel generally less well than usual.
It can take up to 14 days for symptoms to show.
They can be similar to symptoms of cold or flu.
If you have any symptoms of COVID19, selfisolate (stay in your room) and phone a GP (Doctor).
They can arrange a COVID19 test for you.
For more information on COVID19, please visit www.hse.ie/coronavirus or call HSELive on 1850 24 1850.
Who is most at risk from COVID19?
Older people and people with certain health conditions have a higher risk of getting seriously ill if they get COVID19.
What is the COVID19 vaccine?
A vaccine is a substance that should improve immunity (protection) to a particular disease.
The COVID19 vaccine will offer you protection from COVID19.
If people are vaccinated, it should also reduce the numbers who become seriously ill or even die from COVID19 in our community.
Vaccines teach your immune system how to protect you from diseases.
It is much safer for your immune system to learn how to protect you through vaccination than by getting COVID19.
Who should get the vaccine?
You can see the list of groups for vaccination on this website: www.gov.ie/covid19vaccine
While it is up to you to decide to get the vaccine, the HSE, the World Health Organization and the Department of Health strongly recommend that you do so as soon as it is offered to you.
Vaccines will be given as the supply arrives in Ireland.
When it’s your turn, we will let you know how to get your vaccine through advertising or direct invitation.
It is important not to contact the HSE for a vaccination before then.
You will need to read this leaflet and the manufacturer’s Patient Information Leaflet before you get the vaccine.
You can find the manufacturer’s Patient Information Leaflet on: www.hse.ie/covid19vaccinePIL
You can also talk to a healthcare professional in advance.
If you decide to get the vaccine, you will give your consent, which will be recorded.
The HSE is offering the vaccine free of charge.
Why is it important to get the COVID19 vaccine? Getting a COVID19 vaccine should reduce your risk of getting COVID19 and protect you from serious complications of the illness.
Our aim in offering the vaccine to the population is to protect people and reduce the illness and deaths caused by this virus.
I already had COVID19, so do I need to get the vaccine? Yes.
Even if you have already had COVID19, you could still get it again.
The vaccine will reduce your risk of getting COVID19 again.
Even if you do get COVID19 again, the vaccine can reduce the seriousness of your symptoms.
I have COVID19 now, should I get the vaccine? No.
You should delay getting vaccinated until you recover from COVID19.
at least four weeks after you first notice symptoms or
four weeks since you tested positive for COVID19
Getting the vaccine
Who is my vaccinator?
Your vaccinator is the person who gives you your vaccine.
They are trained by the HSE to give COVID19 vaccines.
Can the COVID19 vaccine give you COVID19? No.
The COVID19 vaccine cannot give you COVID19.
It is possible to have caught COVID19 before getting your vaccine and not realise you have the symptoms until after your vaccination appointment.
If you have any symptoms of COVID19, it is important to selfisolate (stay in your room) and arrange a free test to find out if you have COVID19.
If you have a fever which starts more than two days after you get the vaccine, or lasts longer than two days, you should selfisolate and ask a GP (Doctor) to arrange a COVID19 test for you.
If you have COVID19 symptoms after the first dose, you still need to have the second dose.
While you may get some protection from the first dose, having the second dose will give you the best protection against the virus.
Should I get the COVID19 vaccine if I have a high temperature?
You should delay getting the vaccine if you have a fever (temperature of 38 degrees Celsius or above), until you feel better.
Is it safe to get the vaccine if pregnant or breastfeeding?
If you have had your first dose of the vaccine and are pregnant or breastfeeding you should get your second dose after 12 weeks.
You will be at greater risk of severe illness if you do not get your second dose.
What vaccine am I being offered?
The vaccine we are offering you is called Vaxzevria.
The vaccine is manufactured by AstraZeneca.
This viral vector vaccine contains a harmless version of a different virus (the vector).
This teaches your body how to make a protein that will trigger an immune response.
Your body then makes antibodies that help fight the infection if the COVID19 virus enters your body in the future.
Is the vaccine safe?
The HSE only uses vaccines when they meet the required standards of safety and effectiveness.
While the work to develop COVID19 vaccines has moved much faster than usual, the vaccine we are offering you has gone through all the usual steps needed to develop and approve a safe and effective vaccine.
In order to be approved for use, the COVID19 vaccine went through all the clinical trials and safety checks all other licensed medicines go through, following international standards of safety.
The vaccine we are offering you is called Vaxzevria, manufactured by AstraZeneca.
It has been tested with thousands of people as part of clinical trials
It has met strict standards of safety, quality and effectiveness, and been approved and licensed by regulators.
For Ireland, the regulator is the European Medicines Agency (EMA) – visit www.ema.europa.eu for more information.
How is the COVID19 vaccine given?
The COVID19 vaccine is given as an injection into your upper arm.
It will only take a few minutes.
How many doses of the COVID19 vaccine will I need?
You will need two doses of the COVID19 vaccine to get longer lasting protection.
You need to get the second dose 12 weeks after the first dose.
What are the side effects of the vaccine?
Like all medicines, vaccines can cause side effects.
Most of these are mild to moderate, shortterm, and not everyone gets them.
More than one in 10 people may experience:
feeling tired
tenderness, bruising, pain or itching in the arm where they had the vaccine injection
headache
muscle pain
joint pain
nausea
fever (temperature of 38 degrees Celsius or above)
More than 1 in 100 people may have redness or swelling where they had the injection, diarrhoea, vomiting or a low platelet count (that doesn’t cause any symptoms).
More than 1 in 1000 people may have a reduced appetite, dizziness, sleepiness, sweating, swollen lymph glands or a rash.
Serious side effects, like a severe allergic reaction, are very rare, seen in approximately 1 in 100,000 people.
Your vaccinator is trained to treat very rare serious allergic reactions.
Very rarely 1 in 100,000 people may develop very unusual blood clots with low platelets.
1 in 5 of these people may die.
These blood clots are less likely to be reported after the second dose of the vaccine.
The risk of this very rare condition is higher in younger people.
Your GP, Doctor or vaccinator can advise you on the risks and benefits of getting this vaccine.
The COVID19 vaccine has gone through the same clinical trials and safety checks as all other licensed vaccines, however the vaccine is new and long term side effect information is limited.
As more people in Ireland and around the world get this vaccine, more information on side effects may become available.
The HSE will update this information regularly on our website, and if necessary, will update the information leaflets given to people at their first or second dose of the vaccine.
Symptoms of very rare blood clots
Even though the risk of blood clots with low platelets is extremely low, you should know the signs to watch out for.
Get urgent medical help if you get any of these symptoms after the Vaxzevria vaccine:
breathlessness
pain in the chest or stomach
swelling or coldness in a leg
severe or worsening headache, blurred vision, confusion or seizures
persistent bleeding, under the skin where there was no previous injury
multiple small bruises, reddish or purplish spots, or blood blisters under the skin
The very rare blood clots with low platelets were usually reported within 14 days of getting the Vaxzevria vaccine.
Watch out for these symptoms in the weeks after your vaccination.
Fever after the vaccine
It’s quite common to develop a fever after a vaccination.
Usually, this happens within two days (48 hours) of getting the vaccine, and it goes away within two days.
You are more likely to get a fever after your first dose of the vaccine.
If you feel uncomfortable, take paracetamol or ibuprofen as directed on the box or leaflet.
If you are concerned, please seek medical advice.
Are there some people who should not get the COVID19 vaccine?
You should not get the COVID19 vaccine if:
you are under 50 years of age.
This is because of the very rare risk of blood clots with low platelets after the vaccine.
You will be offered a different vaccine.
you have had a severe allergic reaction to any of the ingredients in the vaccine (including polysorbate 80).
Read the manufacturer’s Patient Information Leaflet to see the list of ingredients.
you have had a severe allergic reaction to a previous dose of this vaccine.
you had blood clots with low platelets after a previous dose of this vaccine.
If you have had an immediate allergic reaction to any other vaccine or injectable therapy, you should talk to your Doctor before getting the COVID19 vaccine.
Most people will be able to safely get the vaccine.
The person giving you the vaccine will be happy to answer any questions you have at your appointment for the vaccine.
They will also give you an aftercare advice leaflet, and a vaccine record card showing the name and batch number of the vaccine you have been given.
Should I get a second dose of the vaccine if I am under 50? If you are under 50 and have already had your first dose of the vaccine, you should get your second dose after 12 weeks.
How long does it take the vaccine to work?
It takes 3 weeks, after getting the first dose, for the vaccine to work.
You will have the best protection from COVID19 after the second dose, which you should get 12 weeks after your first dose.
There is a chance you might still get Covid19, even if you have the vaccine.
Does the vaccine work in everyone?
Worldwide, vaccines save at least 2 to 3 million lives each year, and protect many more from lifelong illnesses.
Millions of people have now received COVID19 vaccines all over the world.
There’s strong, reliable evidence that COVID19 vaccines greatly reduce your risk of getting COVID19.
They’re highly effective at preventing deaths and serious illness with COVID19.
If you have a weakened immune system, there is no extra risk in taking the vaccine but it may not work as well for you.
When I get the vaccine, does that mean I won’t spread COVID19 to others?
We do not know yet if having the vaccine stops you spreading the COVID19 virus to others.
That is why it is important that we all continue to follow public health advice on how to stop the spread of the virus.
follow social distancing guidelines
keep two metres apart from others where possible
wear a face covering
wash your hands regularly
Thank you for protecting yourself and others.
How long does immunity last from the vaccine?
We do not know yet how long immunity will last.
Clinical trials are ongoing to find this out.
For more information, read the manufacturer’s Patient Information Leaflet.
This will be printed for you on the day you get your vaccine, or you can find it on www.hse.ie/covid19vaccinePIL
You can also talk to a health professional, like your GP (Doctor), Pharmacist or healthcare team.
You can also visit the HSE website at www.hse.ie/covid19vaccine or call HSELive on 1850 24 1850.
For more information on the COVID19 vaccine, including materials in other formats and translation support visit
How do I report side effects?
As with all vaccines, you can report suspected side effects to the Health Products Regulatory Authority (HPRA).
The HPRA is the regulatory authority in the Republic of Ireland for medicines, medical devices and other health products.
As part of its role in the safety monitoring of medicines, the HPRA operates a system through which healthcare professionals or members of the public can report any suspected adverse reactions (side effects) associated with medicines and vaccines which have occurred in Ireland.
The HPRA strongly encourages reporting of suspected adverse reactions (side effects) associated with Covid19 vaccines to support continuous monitoring of their safe and effective use.
To report a suspected adverse reaction to the Covid19 vaccine, please visit www.hpra.ie/report.
You can also ask your Doctor or a family member to report this for you.
As much information as is known should be provided, and where possible, the vaccine batch number should be included.
The HPRA cannot provide clinical advice on individual cases.
Members of the public should contact their healthcare professional (their Doctor or Pharmacist) with any medical concerns they may have.
In order to administer the vaccine safely and to record all the necessary information to monitor and manage the vaccine, the HSE will be processing your personal information.
All information processed by the HSE will be in accordance to the general laws and in particular the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) which came into force in 2018.
The processing of your data will be lawful and fair.
It will only be processed for the specific purpose to manage the vaccinations.
The principle of Data Minimisation has been applied.
This means that only data that is necessary to identify you, book your appointment, record your vaccination and monitor its effects is being recorded.
You have the following rights as a data subject under the GDPR in respect of your personal data that are processed.
Request information on and access to your personal data (commonly known as a ‘data subject access request’).
This enables you to receive a copy of the personal data we hold about you and to check that we are lawfully processing it.
Request correction of the personal data that we hold about you.
This enables you to have any incomplete or inaccurate information we hold about you corrected.
Request erasure of your personal data.
This enables you to ask us to delete or remove personal data where there is no good reason for us continuing to process it.
You also have the right to ask us to delete or remove your personal information where you have exercised your right to object to processing.
Object to processing of your personal data.
﻿After your COVID19 Vaccine Janssen
Thank you for protecting yourself and others by getting the vaccine.
Now that you have had your vaccine, we ask you to read this document carefully, so you know how you can expect to feel in the next few days and where to get more information.
Do read the COVID19 vaccine information leaflet we gave you about the vaccine too.
We are also giving you a record of your vaccination today.
Please keep the record card safe.
What might happen in the next few days?
Some people who got the vaccine that you got today will:
have swelling, redness and/or pain in the arm where they had the vaccine injection
feel tired
get a headache
have a cough
have muscle pain
have joint pain
have nausea
get a fever (temperature of 38 degrees Celsius or above).
There have been very rare cases of unusual blood clots with low platelets in the blood in the first few weeks after vaccination.
Platelets help the blood to clot.
You should seek prompt medical assistance and mention your recent vaccination if you:
are breathless
have pain in the chest or stomach
have swelling or coldness in a leg
get a severe or worsening headache (particularly 3 or more days after the vaccine)
have blurred vision, confusion or seizures
have persistent bleeding under the skin where there was no previous injury
have many small bruises, reddish or purplish spots, or blood blisters under the skin.
As with all vaccines, you can report suspected side effects to the Health Products Regulatory Authority (HPRA).
To report side effects to a COVID19 vaccine, please visit www.hpra.ie/report What if I have a fever or have aches and pains?
If you have a fever or you have aches and pains, you can take paracetamol or ibuprofen to help.
However, if your fever lasts more than 48 hours or if you are still concerned, please seek medical advice.
The good news
Getting a COVID19 vaccine should protect you from the serious complications of COVID19.
Vaccines teach your immune system to protect you from diseases.
It is much safer for your immune system to learn this through vaccination than by getting COVID19.
We are still learning
It takes 14 days after getting your vaccine for it to work.
There is a chance you might still get COVID19 even if you have the vaccine.
We do not know yet if having the vaccine stops you spreading the virus to others, so you must continue to follow public health advice:
follow social distancing guidelines
(keep two metres apart from others where possible)
wear a face covering
wash your hands regularly.
If you are unsure about anything, or have any questions about the COVID19 vaccine please ask your vaccinator today.
Visit www.hse.ie/covid19vaccine for more information on the COVID19 vaccine.
Side Effects
﻿Keeping well this winter
The next few months will be hard, for all of us, as we live with the impact of COVID19 (coronavirus) on our lives.
But there are ways we can make it a little better for ourselves.
This season, make a plan to help and care for yourself.
Keeping active, getting outside and staying connected with other people can make a positive difference.
Some days, some weeks will be harder than others.
This is especially true at times when we are living with restrictions, have to limit our social interactions and need to keep two metres social distancing even with friends.
Or if we have to self isolate because of symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID19.
This booklet contains health information that you will find useful.
The centre pages also contain space for you to note local phone numbers and contacts that you can use when you need to.
Go for a walk
Minding your health
Eating well
Exercise and physical activity
Minding your mental health
General health checks and essentials
Flu vaccine
Regular and routine health checks
Attending healthcare appointments
Antibiotics and other medicines
Prescriptions
Medical card and GP visit cards
COVID19 information
Symptoms and what to do if you’re sick
COVID19 testing
Selfisolation
Restricted movements
COVID19, colds and flu what’s the difference?
Eat healthy
Exercise
Get a good night’s sleep
Family
Friends
GP
Pharmacy
Community support
Helpful resources
My contacts
Minding your health
Looking after your physical and mental health is more important than ever now.
Healthy eating and getting regular exercise are vital for health.
Eating well
Eating a variety of nourishing foods provides the energy (calories) and nutrients that you need to stay healthy.
Hot meals and drinks help to keep you warm, so have regular hot drinks and eat at least one hot meal a day if possible.
Eating regularly helps keep energy levels up during winter.
Unexpected weight loss
These tips will help you have healthy eating habits throughout the coming months.
Try to eat 5 to 7 portions of fruit and veg every day.
Plan your meals in advance.
This will help you to introduce variety and eat more nutritious foods.
Prepare your meals using mostly fresh ingredients.
Choose foods like fruits, salads and vegetables for snacks.
Frozen vegetables and fruits like berries are a great option for having in the freezer.
Different foods have different nutrients so if possible try to have a variety of meals throughout the week.
When you are buying fruit and vegetables, try to include a range of colours (think of a rainbow) as the different coloured options have different vitamins.
Use healthier cooking methods such as grilling or baking, rather than frying or roasting with oil or fat.
Choose wholemeal and wholegrain breads, cereals, pasta and brown rice where possible.
Include a small amount of lean protein foods such as poultry, fish, eggs, nuts, beans or meat at two meals in the day.
For older people, protein foods are important at all meals to help keep muscles strong.
Try to eat five to seven portions of fruit, vegetables and salad each day.
At mealtimes, aim for half of your plate to be vegetables or salad.
Make mealtimes special, whether you are eating on your own or with others.
Enjoy your meals at a table and focus on your food rather than watching TV or scrolling on your phone.
Avoid having foods that are high in calories, sugar and fat every day.
They contain very little nutrition and can be very high in calories.
Visit hse.ie/healthyeatingguidelines for more info on healthy eating.
For easy to prepare, tasty and nutritious recipes, search online for ‘Safefood 101 Square Meals cookbook’.
If you or someone you know is experiencing unplanned weight loss that might be related to illness, social isolation or reduced appetite, it is important to tell your GP or public health nurse.
They can recommend some dietary resources that can help, such as a highenergy highprotein cookbook called Making the Most of Every Bite.
The cookbook and other resources are available on hse.ie/nutritionsupports but make sure you seek advice from your GP, nurse or dietitian first.
Unplanned weight gain
Changes in everyday routines, like working from home, stress, physical activity, sleep and eating can affect your weight.
Visit hse.ie/healthyeatingguidelines for information on portion sizes and meal ideas, or talk to your GP or healthcare professional.
Exercise and physical activity
Getting some exercise every day, ideally outdoors, is important for both physical and mental health.
If you are an older adult or if you have an underlying health condition or a disability, exercise and activity may feel harder to do.
But they are really important for things like muscle strength and bone health, which can help to maintain strength, flexibility and prevent falls.
How much exercise do I need?
Make an exercise plan.
These tips will help you to enjoy being more active this winter.
Children and young people aged 2 to 18 should be active, at a moderate to vigorous level, for at least 60 minutes every day.
Moderate activity means your heart is beating faster than normal and breathing is harder than normal.
Vigorous activity means your heart is beating much faster than normal and breathing is much harder than normal.
Every adult should be active at a moderate level at least 30 minutes a day 5 days a week.
Moderate activity means your breathing and heart rate increase, but you are still able to carry on a conversation.
You should feel warm or be sweating slightly at a comfortable pace.
Make a plan to include exercise in your daily routine.
Think about a 20 or 30minute walk each day and also include some other physical activity, such as an online exercise class or sport, two to three times a week if you can.
If you are finding it hard to get into a routine of regular exercise, try to arrange meeting up with a friend or family member, this can help to encourage you.
Household activities like vacuuming, washing windows, and reorganising cupboards all add up to daily
Plan for how you can exercise even when the weather is wet or windy outside.
Can you invest in waterproof clothing and shoes so that you can still go outdoors? Ask friends or family members for recommendations that you can do indoors on those days when you don’t feel like going outside.
Many adults and children who have a disability will also find some exercise enjoyable and helpful for overall physical and mental health.
If you have a disability aim to be as active as the disability allows in order to meet the guideline for your age group.
If you are supporting someone who has a disability, you can check in with their healthcare provider for ideas on what type of activity or exercise is most suitable and safe.
Children’s activity should also include musclestrengthening, flexibility and bonestrengthening exercises three times a week.
Adults also need to include activities which increase muscular strength and endurance on two to three days per week.
The HSE website features a range of indoor exercises suitable for older people.
Search online for ‘HSE indoor exercises’.
Or ask a family member, friend or practice nurse if they can print these for you.
Examples of musclestrengthening exercises
Situps, squats, push ups, lunges, carrying shopping, pushing a lawn mower or lifting hand weights.
Examples of bonestrengthening exercises
All weight bearing activity like running, jogging, jumping or skipping.
Minding your mental health
Lots of us are finding all of the changes to our lives as a result of COVID19 upsetting and difficult to deal with.
Here are some tips to help you mind your mental health during this time.
Daily routine
Having a healthy daily routine is really important for mental health.
During difficult times like this, it’s best if you can keep some structure in your day.
This means eating well, physical activity and exercise, regular sleep habits, and things that you like or enjoy, such as reading a book or being creative.
Stay connected
Stay connected with other people in ways that are safe for you.
If you are not able to meet family or friends because of restrictions, stay in regular contact by phone, letter or email.
Try to listen only to the facts
Keep a realistic perspective of the situation based on facts.
Stay informed but set times and limits for news.
If you find yourself becoming overwhelmed by the news, try to talk about it with someone.
Be mindful
If you smoke or drink, try to avoid doing this more than usual.
Both can affect your mood and overall health and won’t help you in the longterm.
If you would like help to stop smoking, Freephone 1800 201 203 or visit quit.ie
Stay connected and do something you enjoy.
Try to keep a healthy routine, eat well, exercise and get enough sleep.
Changes that you may have noticed
Over the last few months you may have noticed some of the following changes or difficulties for you or someone you care about:
increased anxiety
feeling stressed
finding yourself excessively checking for symptoms, in yourself, or others becoming irritable more easily
feeling insecure or unsettled
fearing that normal aches and pains might be the virus
having trouble sleeping
feeling helpless or a lack of control
having irrational thoughts
Supports are available.
If you need support
GPs are available and can help if you are experiencing mental health problems.
You can phone to make an appointment and they can arrange a phone or video consultation if that suits you better.
Mental health helplines, including the Samaritans, can be a support through crisis or distress.
You can call the Samaritans on 116 123 and calls are free from landline phone or mobile.
Text support services are also an option.
You can text HELLO to 50808 for a calming chat and immediate support if you are going through a mental health or emotional crisis.
This is a HSE funded service.
For more information on mental health and services, please visit the HSE website yourmentalhealth.ie or call the Your Mental Health Information Line on 1800 111 888.
Suicidal thoughts and feelings can sometimes be part of a mental health crisis.
Please remember that if you are in crisis or feeling suicidal, or if you know someone who is at immediate risk of harm, you can call the emergency services on 112 or 999 for help.
General health checks and essentials
Flu vaccine
Flu season lasts from October to April.
Flu can cause serious illness for some people.
The flu vaccine is available free of charge from GPs and pharmacists for people who are at risk of complications from the flu.
This includes adults aged 65 and over, anyone who is pregnant, those with a longterm illness, and for the first time children aged 2 to age 12.
Regular and routine health checks
If you have a longterm health condition like diabetes, epilepsy, or high blood pressure think about any health checks that you might need to have over the coming months.
Contact your GP to arrange a suitable and safe consultation time.
If you need to speak with your GP about any other health concern, please don’t delay.
GPs, hospitals and other health services are open and ready to take care of you.
Most GPs now offer phone or video consultations.
This means you can talk to your GP without leaving your home.
For a phone consultation, you just need to give your phone number to the surgery.
For a video consultation, you will need a smartphone or computer with a reliable internet connection and webcam.
Please remember that if you have any symptoms of COVID19, you should not go to your GP surgery.
Phone your GP for advice instead.
Attending healthcare appointments
There may be some health concerns where a phone or video consultation won’t be suitable.
In this case, there are a few things to remember:
Arrive at the time of your appointment.
If you arrive early, you may be asked to wait in another area or in your car if you travelled that way.
This is to help maintain social distancing within the clinic.
Wear a face mask and use the hand sanitiser which is available in the clinic.
f the clinic has specific ‘entry’ and ‘exit’ doors, use these.
This will help to reduce the number of people you come into contact with.
Go into the clinic on your own, unless you need to have someone with you.
A parent or guardian can accompany a child to their appointment.
Antibiotics do not work for viral infections such as COVID19, colds and flu.
Antibiotics and other medicines
COVID19 Information
How to prevent the spread
Antibiotics are medicines used to treat infections caused by bacteria.
You may need antibiotics if you have a bacterial infection that is unlikely to go away without them.
Antibiotics do not work for viral infections such as COVID19, colds and flu, and most coughs and sore throats.
Taking antibiotics when we don’t need them puts us at risk of harm such as skin rash, diarrhoea and other side effects.
Tell your GP if you are prescribed antibiotics and are taking other medication.
Some antibiotics don’t mix well with other medicines.
Your doctor may not know all the medicines that you are taking as they may have been prescribed by different doctors.
Ask your GP or pharmacist if the antibiotic is safe to take with your other medicine.
Prescriptions
If you are on regular medication for a health condition, keep a list of your medicines in a safe place.
This is really helpful if you need to go to the doctor or to the pharmacist.
There is space in this booklet to keep your list, see page 19, or you can just keep it on a piece of paper at home.
If you have a mobile phone, take and keep a photo of your list.
You don’t have to go to your GP in order to get a repeat prescription.
You can phone and tell them what you need.
They can arrange to send the prescription to your local pharmacy for you.
You or someone you trust can collect it from there.
Medical cards and GP visit cards
For information about medical cards and other health payment supports, search online for ‘HSE schemes and allowances’.
Distance yourself at least 2 metres (6 feet) away from other people, especially those who might be unwell
Wear a face covering at all times when shopping, on public transport, in a healthcare setting and when in close contact with people
Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces
Minimise the number of people in your social network
Avoid crowds and crowded places
Don’t share food or other items such as mugs or glasses
Wash your hands well and often to avoid contamination
Don’t shake hands or hug when saying hello or greeting other people
Know the symptoms.
If you have them self isolate and contact your GP immediately
Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue or sleeve when coughing or sneezing and discard used tissue safely
Avoid touching eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands
Download the COVID tracker app
COVID19 Symptoms and what to do if you’re sick
It can take up to 14 days for symptoms to appear.
The most common symptoms are:
Free HSE COVID19 testing
You will be referred for a free COVID19 test if you have symptoms and, following a phone consultation, your GP advises that you need a test.
If you have been in close contact with someone who has tested positive for the virus, the HSE public health tracing team might contact you and arrange for you to be tested.
Keep your phone close to you and make sure it is switched on.
You will find more detailed information on testing on the HSE website, search for ‘HSE COVID testing’.
Or you can Freephone HSELive on 1850 24 1850 for information.
Cough
This can be any kind of cough, usually dry but not always
Sudden loss of smell
Fever
High temperature over 38 degrees celsius
Sudden loss of taste
Shortness of breath
You may display one, some or all of these symptoms.
Breathing difficulties
Self isolation
Self isolation means staying indoors and completely avoiding contact with other people, including the people you live with.
If you live with other people, stay on your own in a room with a window that you can open for fresh air, if possible.
If you develop symptoms, you should selfisolate to protect other people, and phone your GP.
See the next pages for information on self isolating.
Other people you live with will need to restrict their movements
Your GP consultation is free of charge if you have any of these symptoms.
Please phone your GP and do not go to your GP surgery, because if you do have the virus you could pass it on to someone else.
Your GP will advise over the phone if you need to have a test.
If you need a test, it is also free of charge.
You have to self isolate when there is a high risk that you could spread the virus to other people.
Self isolate:
if you have symptoms of COVID19
while you wait for a test appointment and your test results, if you have symptoms of COVID19.
If you are being tested as a close contact and you don’t have any symptoms, you should restrict your movements instead (see next page)
if you have had a positive test result for COVID19, even if you have mild symptoms or no symptoms
People in your household will need to restrict their movements (stay at home) for 14 days.
This is because it can take up to two weeks for symptoms of COVID19 to show.
When you can stop self isolation:
Most people can stop self isolating when both of these apply:
you have had no fever for five days
it has been ten days since you first developed symptoms
If you tested positive because you are a close contact, you may have no symptoms.
In this case, you can stop selfisolating ten days from the date of your test.
Restricted movements
Restricting your movements means staying at home to avoid contact with other people.
Restricting your movements helps to stop the spread of COVID19.
You can still go outside to exercise by yourself as long as you keep 2 metres away from other people.
Restrict your movements for 14 days if you:
are a close contact of a confirmed case of COVID19
live with someone who has symptoms of COVID19 but you feel well
arrive in Ireland from a country that is not on the green list
If you are caring for someone who cannot self isolate you should restrict your movements for 17 days.
Restrict your movements for 14 days if you are a close contact of a person who tested positive for COVID19.
Do this from when you were last in contact with that person.
You must do this even if your test comes back negative.
This is because it can take up to 14 days for the virus to show up in your system after you have been exposed to it.
For more detailed information, please visit hse.ie/coronavirus or call HSELive
Self isolation means staying indoors and completely avoiding contact with other people.
COVID19, colds, flu: What’s the difference?
Colds, coughs and flu are common in winter time.
Flu season generally lasts from October to April.
This year, we should all make a particular effort to avoid getting coughs, colds and flu.
We can help to do this by washing hands, keeping social distance, eating a healthy, nutritious diet, and getting regular exercise.
If you are at risk of serious complications from the flu you can also get the flu vaccine free of charge from your GP or pharmacist.
You are at higher risk if you are aged 65 or over, if you have a longterm illness, if you are pregnant, and for children aged 2 to 12 years old.
If someone around you has a cold or flu, try to avoid becoming infected yourself by keeping away from them, and cleaning and disinfecting any shared surfaces or items, such as cutlery.
Avoid sharing toothbrushes, food items or drinks with other people in your home.
The actions we take to protect ourselves and others from COVID19 (hand washing, washing and disinfecting surfaces regularly, cough and sneeze etiquette) will also help to protect us from colds and flu.
Helpful resources
Get outside every day, if it is safe to do so and I am well enough.
Stick to a regular healthy routine of diet, exercise and sleep and eat lots of fruit and vegetables.
Get a good night’s sleep.
Connect with at least one family member, friend or neighbour every day, if possible.
Have a list of medicines and my Eircode in a very handy place, in case I need them.
Find something that I enjoy, watching tv, reading a book, doing some art, cooking, knitting or sewing, listening to audiobooks or podcasts.
Notice and acknowledge good things that happen each day, write them down if it helps.
My contacts
My family and friends
My list of medicines
Medicine Dosage How often
My GP and pharmacy
﻿COVID Tracker app Help us reduce the spread of COVID19 in Ireland
The HSE has made a free smartphone app that helps improve contact tracing for COVID19.
If you use the app, you can help protect people you come into contact with and reduce the spread of coronavirus.
The app protects your privacy and you keep control of your information.
What is an app?
An app or application allows a mobile phone to do certain tasks.
Apps on your phone might include Facebook, Instagram or WhatsApp.
If you use the app, you can:
get an alert if you have been in close contact with someone who tests positive for COVID19
alert others if you test positive for coronavirus – this will help keep other people safe
track your symptoms and get advice on what to do if you’re sick
get regular updates, and protect yourself and others as we learn to live with COVID19
What does the COVID Tracker app do?
Contact tracing
It helps speed up contact tracing and reach more people with the right advice.
When someone tests positive for COVID19, HSE contact tracing teams identify their close contacts.
This could be family, friends or others that you have spent time with.
The contact tracing team tells these close contacts what to do and advises on testing for COVID19.
The app helps to find close contacts you might have forgotten, or who are unknown to you.
The app does this while protecting your privacy.
COVID CheckIn
You can use the app to record any symptoms you have of COVID19 and get advice on what to do.
This information is anonymous and will be used to help us understand how COVID19 is spreading and affecting people in Ireland.
Updates on COVID19
App users will have access to the latest information about COVID19 in Ireland.
How will you protect my privacy?
The app exchanges secure, anonymous records when people using the app are in close contact with each other.
The app will never identify you to other app users and you cannot access each other’s information.
The app does not collect your name, location or movements.
Your records are collected anonymously and stored on your mobile phone.
If you test positive for COVID19, you can choose to upload your records to anonymously alert your close contacts.
You can choose to put your mobile phone number into the app.
The contact tracing team will call you, if you receive a close contact alert, to give you advice and arrange a test, if needed.
If you choose to use the COVID CheckIn function to record any symptoms you have, you can share your town or county, age group and sex, to help the HSE understand the spread of COVID19 in Ireland.
How do I download the COVID Tracker app?
There are two ways to download the app.
Go to www.covidtracker.ie on your phone and follow the steps on the page.
Go to the Google Play Store or Apple App Store on your mobile phone.
Search ‘COVID Tracker Ireland’ and click ‘Install’ or ‘Get’.
When you do this, the COVID Tracker yellow icon will appear on your phone screen.
Follow the steps in the app to set it up.
Can I delete the COVID Tracker app from my phone?
You can uninstall the app at any time.
This will delete the data that the app has stored on your phone.
The data that you have shared with other phones will also be deleted.
Stopping the spread of COVID19
The app will help us to track and stop the spread of COVID19 as we continue to reopen services and communities.
It goes hand in hand with the other important steps we can all take.
Everyone should continue to:
wash hands regularly
cover coughs and sneezes
practice social distancing
wear face coverings in shops, public transport and other places difficult to keep our distance
We have all helped to reduce the spread of COVID19 in Ireland.
The more people who download and use the app, the more it will help to reduce the spread of COVID19.
Download the app today and help us to quickly trace and help those with COVID19.
For more information, go to covidtracker.ie
Stay safe.
Protect each other.
﻿Updated FAQs for School Principals or Designated Contact Person
This leaflet was developed for school principals or designated contact person by the HSE in collaboration with the Department of Education.
New or significantly changed information:
Close contact testing:
What is the period of restricted movements required of a pupil/student or staff member deemed to be a “close contact”?
Pupils/students will be asked to restrict their movements.
In line with national recommendations for close contacts, testing is offered at Day 0 and Day 10.
If a close contact received a ‘not detected’ result from both tests, then they can end their restricted movements and return to school.
If they have a ‘detected’ test result, they will then be managed as a case of COVID19.
If they do not undertake COVID19 testing, then they are required to restrict their movements for a full 14 days.
Anyone who is a close contact of a person that tested positive for COVID19 has to restrict their movements and follow the process as above.
Restricted movements start from the last date they were in contact with a confirmed case of COVID19.
As several close contacts are usually identified in an education setting, the date of D10 testing can change, depending on the results public health receives from everyone’s Day 0 testing.
Often the date of D10 testing will be pushed out.
All close contacts will be informed of their new date of D10 testing and prolonged restricted movements, if this is the case.
A close contact can stop restricting their movement and return to school when both of the following apply:
They have a negative test (COVID19 not detected) 10 days after they were last in contact with a person who tested positive for COVID19.
They do not have any symptoms of COVID19
As per data protection regulations, a school cannot confirm the name of the pupil/student and/or staff member who tested positive (‘detected’) for COVID19.
Do ‘close contacts’ of close contacts need to be excluded from schools?
Nationally it is not recommended the close contacts of close contacts need to also restrict their movements, and therefore siblings of close contacts identified through the schools setting can still attend school.
If there are particular concerns following the case and school PHRA being undertaken, the public health doctor may sometimes request siblings also restrict their movements, but this will be a specific clinical recommendation.
It is not routine and siblings of schools close contacts identified should not be excluded by schools.
Previous infection with COVID19
What if a staff or student says they have had COVID19 previously?
Staff / students and in the case of young children, the parents should be told to discuss with the HSE schools teams.
If there is clear evidence of a confirmed infection with COVID19 within the past 6 months, as per national guidelines, then as long as staff/student has no symptoms, then they are not determined as a close contact and do not need to restrict their movements.
This does not apply if there are specific concerns the case may have a particular variant of concern e.g.
Brazilian P1 variant or South African B.1.351.
In these circumstances restricted movements will apply, but public health teams will determine this.
For the majoriy of staff and students who have had a confirmed case of COVID19 within the last six months, they will not need to restrict their movements and can return to school.
Singing
Guidance for singing / wind instruments at primary level
Guidance with regard to singing at primary school level remains the same as circulated before Christmas.
This stated that ‘singing whilst maintaining social distancing and within normal pod structures can take place outdoors.
Unfortunately, no parents / guardians will be allowed to attend these outdoor events either’.
It is important that this advice continues, especially as we move closer to end of term festivities.
Guidance for singing / wind instruments at postprimary level
Guidance for singing / wind instruments at post primary level are outlined within the document ‘Return to School Guidance for Practical Subjects in Post Primary Schools and Centres for Education; March 2021’ and should be followed.
Travel
What’s the advice for people travelling into Ireland?
There is a Government Advisory in operation against all nonessential international travel.
If travel is essential, then the advice needs to be followed, depending on whether travel was from a category 1 or category 2 country.
Testing / restriction requirements for people returning from countries are explained on the gov.ie website.
These apply to staff and students who might be returning after travel.
These are legal requirements, and apply to all citizens and residents returning to Ireland.
The requirements as of 17.3.21 state that returning travellers from category 1 countries ‘may leave to take a RTPCR test no less than 5 days after your arrival – if you receive written confirmation that the result of this test is negative/ ‘not detected’ your period of quarantine can end.
You must retain the written confirmation of your test result for at least 14 days.
If your journey began in any of the Category 2 countries , you must complete the full 14 days of quarantine – regardless of whether you have a negative test result.’
As these measures and countries included as Category 1 or category 2 will change, up to date advice should always be sought from here.
HSE schools teams will have no different advice to this national advice.
Data
Schools data is presented weekly on the HSE website here.
It presents information on the number of facilities a PHRA and onward testing has been undertaken and the close contact positivity ie.
For each index case identified to us who attended school in their infectious time period, how many of the identified close contacts tested positive for Covid19.
So far, since schools phased return from 8th February, data up to 13th March shows 118 facilities across SEN, Primary and Post primary have had a PHRA and onward testing undertaken; identifying 2,625 close contacts with 61 cases (2.3%) subsequently testing positive for Covid19.
The reports also present the total number of children who have tested positive for Covid19 in the week, and since Covid19 were first notifiable.
Between March 2020 and 13th March 2021, 24,900 5 18 year olds have had a confirmed diagnosis of Covid19.
This is 2.7% of all children aged 518 years.
The reports are uploaded weekly on to the website.
Pregnancy
Pregnancy related guidelines for the Education Sector have been published and are available on the HSE website here.
Detected result confirmation
If the school is informed of a positive case, what should the school do?
Await instructions from public health don’t panic – classes do not need to be sent home or told not to come in to school.
It is important to remember that the confirmed case is no longer within the school and therefore the risk of onward transmission from that person has been removed from the school setting.
If the case was not in the school setting whilst infectious, then public health will not routinely call the school because there is no significant risk that the case has spread the infection in the school setting.
If the case of COVID19 was in the school during the infectious period the school should await a call from the Department of Public Health.
This will usually be on the same day but may be the next day.
The ‘infectious period’ is the timeframe during which someone with an infectious disease can spread it to other people – the ‘infectious period’ for COVID19 includes the 24 hours before testing for asymptomatic cases, or the 48 hours before symptom onset for symptomatic cases.
The ‘incubation period’ (when someone might be infected with the virus but not unwell) is 14 days (average 47 days) and therefore even if a staff member or student was in the school within the infectious time period, it takes an average of 47 days before any other person might become unwell from becoming infected.
This allows Public Health the time to undertake the Public Health Risk Assessment (PHRA), through same day or following day response.
When public health doctors make contact with the school they will proceed to ask several questions and undertake a PHRA with the school.
What should I expect when Public Health call me?
The regional Department of Public Health will ask several questions and carry out a risk assessment.
Public Health will identify any close contacts from the school setting with you, through the process of the Public Health Risk Assessment (PHRA).
You will be asked by the Department of Public Health to provide information on the close contacts identified.
This information will be required in a specific excel format.
The legal basis for sharing requested data with Public Health (Medical Officers of Health and staff in Departments of Public Health) is the Infectious Diseases Regulations 1981 as amended which provides the legal responsibility for Public Health in Article 11 and the authority in Article 19 which states that ‘Any person who refuses to comply with a requirement or direction given or a request for information made in pursuance of any of the provisions of these Regulations shall be guilty of a contravention of these Regulations’.
This legislation fulfils GDPR Article 6 conditions c, d, and e regarding lawfulness of processing, and processing of special categories of personal data is allowed under Article 9 2 (i).
What is a Public Health Risk Assessment?
Schools teams within regional departments of Public Health will undertake a PHRA with the school to explore the following:
unique information and factors relevant to the case and that particular educational facility and its infrastructure, with regard to infection transmission
interactions of the community of pupils and teachers both within the school and how they interlink within the wider community
patterns of infection within the wider local community and
consider general community infection rates in the regions serviced by the educational facility.
This information will inform the decisions regarding the identification of close contact and any further action required including the need for full, or partial, closure of any school.
The definition of close contacts is on the hpsc website, and this is used, with the information identified through the PHRA to determine who the close contacts are within the school setting.
It will not be automatically assumed that a whole class will be deemed as close contacts.
This is because the school settings are so varied e.g.
in young primary school children, ‘pods’ will likely be deemed close contacts and all removed.
In secondary settings where there is social distancing rather than a ‘pod’ per se, close contacts will be determined by proximity and interaction with the index case; class placement; classroom structure; common travel; social networks and friendship groups etc.
What happens if teachers or students receive notifications of the HSE COVID Tracker App?
Close contacts within the school setting are identified by Departments of Public Health following a Public Health Risk Assessment (PHRA).
If there is any information from the HSE COVID Tracker App, this information will be considered in the risk assessment.
However, it may be that not all people who are alerted through the App are actually deemed close contacts, or vice versa – Public Health might determine that some people who have not been notified by the App are close contacts.
While the COVID tracker App is a very useful tool for collecting information on potential close contacts, Public Health risk assessment and advice overrides the App.
This is because the Public Health Risk Assessment (PHRA) collects more nuanced, composite information to better appraise infection transmission risk in defined circumstances.
Will the Department of Public Health provide instructions to the school as to how to proceed?
Once the Public Health Risk Assessment is complete, the Department of Public Health will then advise you of the public health instructions.
These instructions are delivered by the Medical Officer of Health/ Health officer on the advice of the MOH, under Infectious Diseases legislation.
The advice will typically include asking the school principal to:
Contact the parents/guardians of the pupils/students, who are determined by Public Health to be ‘close contacts’.
Parents of these pupils/students will be asked by the school principal to collect them from school as soon as is safely and practically possible, so they can start restricting their movements.
This may still be at the end of the school day.
Public Health may also ask the school to issue a letter / text message or written guidance to these parents/guardians, prepared and provided by Public Health.
Contact any staff member who may be determined by Public Health to be a “close contact” and ask him/her to go home to start restricting their movements.
If there is a case identified how far back do Public Health go to consider close contacts?
For a confirmed case of COVID19 who was symptomatic, Public Health will identify close contacts in the 48hour period before the person became symptomatic.
If the confirmed case was asymptomatic, then public health will identify close contacts for the 24hour period before the test was taken.
Is contact tracing within the school community always required?
It may well be that for someone who is identified as a confirmed case of COVID19 there is no need to do any contact tracing within the school setting.
This would be because the person was not in school while infectious and therefore no contact tracing of other persons within the school will be required.
In this instance Public Health would not contact the school.
I have heard that someone from the school has been identified as a confirmed case of COVID19 – why has Public Health not contacted me?
It may have already been determined that there are no close contacts or onward transmission risk within the school setting, for example if the individual was not in the school during the infectious period.
When Public Health do need to contact a school, they will usually do so the same day, or following day.
This is safe practice, as the case is no longer within the school setting, and therefore the risk of onward transmission from this case is no longer present.
Can the school share a name of the pupil/student or staff member who is a confirmed case of COVID19?
No, the school cannot share the name of the person who has tested positive for COVID19 (Covid19 detected).
This information is private and confidential.
Close contacts will not be told the name of the confirmed case.
Is the school complying with GDPR requirements when collecting and sharing information on complex/close contacts with the HSE?
Yes, under the Infectious Diseases Regulations 1981, as amended, Medical Officers of Health ask that you collect the data, keep it secure and release it only to Public Health when requested to do so as part of the investigations into a confirmed or suspected case of COVID19.
Processing of these data by the MOH is provided for under GDPR, special category data 9 2(i).
What if the press media or wider school community contact the school?
The following is a generic statement that schools may wish to consider using in full or part in response to press/media queries.
“The school cannot comment on individual cases or outbreaks of COVID19 to protect the privacy and confidentiality of those involved.
The school can confirm that we have engaged with the HSE.
The HSE’s role includes carrying out a Public Health Risk Assessment.
As part of this risk assessment, all close contacts will be identified, contacted and advised of the next steps.
Close contacts are requested not to come to school, in line with HSE Public Health advice.
If Public Health does not make contact with you, you are not impacted and can continue to attend school.
The school will continue to work with the HSE in ensuring all necessary hygiene, health and safety protocols are in place at the school for the prevention and containment of COVID19.”
If a pupil/student and/or staff member develops symptoms
What should the school do if a pupil/student is displaying symptoms while at school?
The pupil/student should be immediately brought to the designated isolation area in the school, which should have good ventilation and preferably a window to the outside that opens.
The school should contact the parents/ guardians and ask them to collect their child as soon as possible.
The pupil/student should be cared for appropriately by a designated staff member until they are collected.
The staff member who is caring for the child should take all necessary precautions as outlined in the public health guidance document.
The staff member assisting with the pupil/student does not need to go home unless they develop symptoms themselves, or are later advised to by public health.
After the symptomatic pupil/student has left the isolation space, it should be cleaned and contact surfaces disinfected.
What should the school do if a staff member is displaying symptoms while at school?
The onus is on the staff member to immediately inform the principal that s/he is displaying symptoms.
The staff member should immediately go home, self isolate and seek medical review by their GP (phone the GP if you have symptoms of COVID19, do not attend in person.
GP assessment for COVID19, and COVID testing if required, are free of cost.)
What should the school do if they are informed over the phone that a pupil/student is symptomatic?
The Principal is asked only to make a note of the pupil/student’s absence.
The principal may note a brief description of the pupil/student’s symptoms, if they are disclosed by the parent.
However, the principal is not required or entitled to ask about clinical symptoms.
Schools can remind parents that if they are concerned a child may have symptoms of COVID19, the child should not attend school and they should contact their GP without delay.
No further actions are required of the school at this stage.
Should a school advise the school community that a staff or pupil/student is symptomatic?
Schools are asked to note that they should not inform other parents or staff members that a pupil/student or staff member has gone home due to their symptoms.
Other pupils/students or staff do not need to be removed from class.
This includes siblings or other household members of staff or pupils/students.
Should siblings/household members of someone with symptoms be removed from the school setting?
Only under certain circumstances: if the GP of the pupil/student/ staff member decides that their symptoms are consistent with COVID19, (for example, fever OR a new cough, shortness of breath, deterioration of existing respiratory condition any loss of or changes to the sense of smell or taste), that person becomes a suspected case of COVID19 and will be referred for a test.
It is at this point that members of the symptomatic person’s household, including siblings or children of staff members, should be withdrawn from school by their parents or guardians and start restricting their movements, until the test results are known.
How will a test be set up for these pupils/student and/or /staff members?
The pupil/student or staff member will be advised to contact their GP.
Their GP will assess them and determine whether they should be referred for a COVID19 test.
If an individual is referred for a COVID19 test, s/he will receive a text message with information of the appointment (time and place).
If a pupil/student has symptoms which may be consistent with COVID19 – what does the parents/ guardian need to do?
If a child has symptoms which could be consistent with COVID19, the parents/guardians should call their GP.
Their GP will decide whether they should be tested for COVID19.
If the GP determines that the child does need a COVID19 test, it is at this point that all of their household contacts are asked to restrict their movements.
This means that siblings or staff members in the same household as the person who has symptoms should be removed from the school setting.
Only the symptomatic case is asked to selfisolate.
Note: there will be many cases where testing is determined not to be required, for example, because the GP thinks that the child’s symptoms are not due to COVID19 and might be due to another cause..
If the GP does not recommend COVID testing, and it is early in the child’s illness, the recommendation is to observe the child for 48 hours and if no further symptoms develop, then they can return to school.
If the GP has made a different diagnosis, parents/guardians should follow advice and recommendations on exclusion depending on this diagnosis.
How soon will the pupil/student or staff member receive a test? A: The person will receive an automated notification of a scheduled appointment at a testing centre at the next possible free slot for testing.
Will the pupil/student or staff member receive one test or more than one test on the basis of being symptomatic? If the latter, why?
If the pupil/student or staff member is experiencing symptoms and has been referred for testing by their GP, they will receive one test.
If a pupil/student/ staff member is identified as a close contact
How will a test be set up for persons identified as a close contact?
The HSE will send an SMS with the appointment date, time and location of the free COVID19 test(s)
How soon will the pupil/student/staff member receive a test after being identified as a close contact?
Public Health will advise on the timing of a test for close contacts.
This will depend on when the pupil/student/staff member was last in contact with the positive case.
Testing will be arranged within 12 days.
Close contacts are recommended to have two tests; one at day 0 and the second at day 10.
Will the pupil/student/staff member receive one test or more than one test? If the latter, why?
Public Health will advise whether a pupil/student/staff member needs one or more tests for COVID19.
They will usually require testing on Day 0 and Day 10 since their last exposure to the confirmed case, but there may be circumstances whereby Public Health require only one test to be undertaken, for example.
if sufficient time has elapsed such that the first test for close contacts will be 7 days since they were last exposed to the individual they will only require one test.
Public Health doctors will make this judgement following the risk assessment.
If a test comes back as “not detected” for a symptomatic pupil/student/staff member, will the person still be required to restrict their movements and why?
If the person receives a negative / ‘not detected’ test result, the person should remain at home until they are well enough to return to school, unless parents/guardians of (pupil/students) or staff members are specifically asked by HSE public health to remain excluded because of further investigation.
A pupil/student /staff member can return to their normal activities, once they have been given either:
a negative (‘notdetected’) test result and are 48 hours without symptoms
another diagnosis, which is not COVID19.
Those who live with the person will then no longer need to restrict their movements.
If a test comes back ‘SARSCoV2 detected’ (confirmed case of COVID19) will the pupil /student/staff member still be required to selfisolate?
If a person was symptomatic for COVID19 they should already be selfisolating.
If a close contact who was restricting their movements receives a positive COVID19 test result (SARSCoV2 detected), they are now a confirmed case of COVID19 and must selfisolate; additionally, their close contacts including household contacts must now also start restricting their movements.
They may already have been restricting their movements, however if only one person in the house was deemed a close contact from an exposure outside the house e.g.
in the school, then the other family members would not have been restricting their movements until this point.
If a pupil/student//staff member has tested positive for COVID19 and self isolated for 10 days thereafter, can they return to school/work?
Yes, provided the following applies:
they have selfisolated for 10 days from onset of symptoms with last 5 days without a fever (high temperature (38 degrees Celsius or over)
if they were asymptomatic they must have selfisolated for 10 days from date of test)
Close contact information
What is the definition of a close contact?
A person is deemed to be a close contact within an education setting if s/he has
had face to face contact for <1m with a confirmed case of COVID19 for >15 minutes in a school day.
been between 1 and 2 metres from a confirmed case of COVID19 for >15 minutes in a school day with consideration of other mitigation measures e.g.
facecoverings, pods, ventilation, IPC measures or uncertain compliance with mitigation measures in place (assessed through clinical PHRA)
Contacts are assessed from contact with a confirmed case of COVID19 during their infectious period 48 hours before the onset of symptoms if symptomatic, or 24 hours before the test for COVID19 was taken in those who are asymptomatic.
Can the class of a confirmed Covid19 case attend school?
The HSE will have carried out a Public Health Risk Assessment (PHRA).
The only individuals who cannot attend school are those who have been identified as close contacts by Public Health.
This may be a small number, for example a ‘pod’, or it could be a full class.
However, if a pupil/student /staff member develops symptoms which could be consisted with Covid19, they should selfisolate immediately and discuss the matter with their GP.
What message can be communicated to the wider school? (if required) or What should the principal do if parents of pupils/students or staff members, that have not been identified as close contact, ring the school for information on the confirmed (positive) case and other close contacts?
A suggested communication would include “The HSE is guiding our school through the actions we need to take to protect staff, students and our school community.
A Public Health Risk Assessment has been carried out.
All close contacts have been identified and sent home from school to restrict their movements for 14 days.
The school community will continue to engage with and implement Public Health advice to protect ourselves and the school community from Covid19“
Can siblings or children of a staff member who is a close contact attend school?
Only the pupil/student/staff member who is a close contact needs to restrict their movements, even though they have no symptoms.
However, no other family member is required to do so – unless also identified as a close contact.
If however the pupil/student/staff member who is a close contact develops symptoms, of COVID19 then they are a suspected case of COVID19 and should now selfisolate and contact their GP, explaining that they have been identified as a close contact of a confirmed case of COVID19 and they now have symptoms too.
If the GP determines they are now a suspected case of COVID19, they will arrange testing and the close contact should:
continue to self isolate; and
household members should restrict their movements, as per guidance for household contacts of a suspected case of COVID19.
Will a pupil/student’s / staff members result be shared with the educational facility?
COVID19 tests remain confidential as per patient – doctor confidentiality.
No other pupil/student, parent, family or teacher will be informed of the results.
However, parents should be advised at the point of testing, that if their child’s result is positive for COVID19(SARSCoV219 detected) then it will likely need to be shared with an appropriate named individual within the school/educational facility, if this is deemed necessary by the Medical Officer of Health for onward safe management of the situation.
Up to date information and advice on coronavirus is available on hse.ie
﻿Reopening Our Schools
The Roadmap for the Full Return to School 27th July 2020
Roadmap for Full Return to Schools
Table of Contents
Roadmap for the Full Return to School
Executive Summary
Public Health Advice
COVID19 Response Plans for Schools
Measures and Operational Changes to be implemented in Schools
Supporting and Promoting Good Hand Hygiene
Enhanced Cleaning Regimes in our Schools
Maintaining Physical Distancing in Schools
Additional Supports Available to Schools
Additional Support for Primary Schools
Additional Support for Post Primary Schools
Additional Support to Special Schools and for Special Classes
Access to Procurement Framework & Funding to support Hand Hygiene & PPE Needs within Schools
Arrangements to Get Children Safely to our Schools
Supporting the Wellbeing of School Communities
Guidance on Learning and School Programmes in 2020/21
Curriculum Guidance
Primary Level
Supporting Pupils with Special Educational Needs (SEN)
PostPrimary Level
Assessment for certification
Pausing Curricular Reform
Provision for Very High Risk Staff and Students and arrangements in the event of school closure in the future
Supporting pupils at “very high risk” of COVID19
Supporting Teaching and Learning in the home where there is localised school closure
Ongoing Communication Arrangements
Continued Stakeholder Engagement
Provision of Support materials for schools
Materials to support students, parents and school communities in returning safely
Roadmap for Full Return to Schools
Direct Communication Channels for Schools
What will schools be like when they reopen?
Roadmap for the Full Return to School
There are almost 1 million students attending school in the primary and post primary sectors, across approximately 4,000 schools, in which close to 100,000 staff are employed.
The announcement on March 12th of the closure of all schools, colleges, universities and other training and learning facilities was the commencement of a series of challenges across the education sector as a result of COVID19.
The interests of students and their families, as well as the safety of the staff, have always been paramount as we have worked through these challenges.
This Roadmap set outs how schools will reopen for all students from the end of August and what the operation of our schools will look like and be sustainable in a COVID19 context.
It has been developed in line with public health advice issued by the Health Protection Surveillance Centre (HPSC), the Roadmap for Society and Business1, and follows comprehensive and intensive engagement with education stakeholders including the school management bodies and staff representatives.
It also reflects a consideration of approaches adopted in other jurisdictions, which have been finalised in recent weeks.
The reopening process is a massive logistical operation, on both a national basis and local level for individual schools.
The Public Health Advice related to reopening of schools provided by the HPSC;
The COVID19 Response Plans for Primary and Special Schools and Post Primary Schools, in line with the Return to Work Safely Protocol, to be implemented in advance of schools reopening.
The Roadmap for Reopening Society and Business sets out 6 overriding principles as follows:
Safe informed and guided by a public health assessment of risk
Rational includes consideration of the social and economic benefits and impacts of any modifications of restrictions and their feasibility
Evidence informed uses all of the data and research available to us to guide thinking
Fair ethical and respects human dignity, autonomy and supports equality
Open & transparent decisions are clear, well communicated and subject to the necessary checks and balances
Whole of Society based on the concept of solidarity and supporting cohesion as we exit over time
The Measures to be implemented in Schools to (i) minimise the risk of introduction of infection in our schools; and
managing risk of spread if introduced through:
Regular and good hand hygiene;
Good respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette;
Enhanced cleaning regimes; and
Maintaining physical distancing in the classroom and within schools;
The suite of Additional Supports available to schools to implement their Covid 19 Response Plan and operate in a sustainable way;
The arrangements to Get Children Safely to our Schools;
How the Mental Health and Wellbeing of Students and Staff will be supported throughout the reopening process,
Guidance on Learning and School Programmes in 2020/21;
How schools can support those staff and students who cannot attend school for health reasons related to COVID19 and in the event of a school closure in the future;
The Communication Arrangements in place to ensure schools, school communities and all stakeholders have clear, relevant and timely information to support the reopening and continued operation of schools; and
A summary on what schools will be like when they reopen.
Schools will reopen for all students from the end of August.
Public Health Advice
On June 24th 2020, the HPSC issued COVID19 recommendations for the reopening of schools and educational facilities (the ‘Public Health Advice’) to the Department of Education to inform the development of sector specific guidance for educational settings.
The interim Public Health Advice was developed in the context of the current COVID19 epidemiology in Ireland, and it specifically notes that it will be updated to reflect the changing situation.
The Department and Minister has continued to engage with health authorities since the publication of the interim recommendations.
The Department will continue to work with the health authorities and implement as appropriate any changes necessary to support school reopening in line with any changes to public health advice to manage the spread of COVID19.
It has been confirmed that at the current time, there is no change to the public health advice for the reopening of schools and educational facilities that was provided at the end of June 2020 by the HPSC.
The public health authorities will keep this under review as evidence emerges from other countries where schools have reopened.
The measures set out in the Public Health Advice are “aimed at risk minimization of COVID19, for young people, teachers, other staff, their families and the wider community, recognizing the importance of education for health and wellbeing and that free primary education provided by the State is a fundamental right guaranteed by the constitution” and provides clear guidance for safe school operation through the prevention, early detection and control of COVID19 in schools, predicated on two general recommendations:
Minimising the risk of introduction of COVID19 into the school community; and
Managing the risk of spread if introduced through:
Regular hand hygiene;
Maintaining physical distancing;
Application of respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette; and
Environmental hygiene.
All Departmental Guidance Documents referred to in the Roadmap, specifically the COVID19 Response Plans and Templates, have been developed in line with the Public Health Advice.
Beyond the specific detailed guidance within the Public Health Advice, there are a number of broad themes outlined in the advice which are critical to our ability to minimising risk associated with COVID19 in our schools:
Roadmap for Full Return to Schools
A Balanced Approach
“One of the key challenges for schools during this pandemic is to balance the need for a practical and sensible level of caution with the need to provide a supportive environment for pupils/students and where teachers feel able to engage with pupils in a way that supports their learning”
Apply CommonSense
“An atmosphere of fear and an overwhelming preoccupation with infection and hygiene can be harmful to teachers and pupils and to the quality of the educational experience without materially reducing the risk of infection beyond what can be achieved with a commonsense approach”
Create Awareness
“A heightened awareness by staff, parents and children (where age appropriate) is required so that they know how to protect themselves and each other and how to recognise and report symptoms of COVID19 infection”
Do Everything Practical to Avoid Introduction of COVID19 into the school “The most critical part of managing the risks of COVID19 related to schools is doing everything practical to avoid introduction of COVID19 into the school.
If the infection is not introduced it cannot spread.
The risk of introduction is related to how common the infection is in the community served by the school at a given time.
If the infection is uncommon in the community then the likelihood of introduction is much lower”
Stay at Home if Unwell
“No person (child, teacher or parent) should attend an educational setting if unwell or any members of their household are unwell with symptoms consistent with COVID19”
Keep doing the key measures to keep us all safe
“Social (Physical) distancing, hand hygiene and good respiratory etiquette should be observed by all (children, teachers, parents and visitors)”
Roadmap for Full Return to Schools
A key element to ensuring that school remain open once they reopen is for everyone in the school community (students, their families and staff) to continue to play their role in keeping the virus out of their school by adopting behaviours in harmony with these broad themes.
The Return to Work Safely Protocol, prepared by the Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation and the Department of Health, is designed to:
support employers and workers to put measures in place that will prevent the spread of COVID19 in the workplace; and
to adapt their workplace procedures and practices to comply fully with the COVID 19 related public health protection measures identified as necessary by the HSE.
It sets out the steps that must be taken before a workplace reopens, and through its operation, including:
mandatory COVID19 induction training;
the appointment of at least one lead worker representative charged with ensuring that COVID19 measures are strictly adhered to in their place of work; and
processes to deal with suspected cases of COVID19.
Schools are places of learning for students whilst all schools are also places of work.
The Return to Work Safely Protocol will be implemented in all schools.
To support schools to implement the Protocol the Department has developed COVID19 Response Plan template documentation tailored to reflect the differences between Post Primary Schools and Primary and Special Schools.
The completion and implementation of the Covid19 Response Plan by a school is the means through which schools can best prevent the introduction and spread of Covid19 in the school environment.
It is a very important living document which will be adapted over time to reflect the evolving COVID19 context.
The COVID19 Response Plan templates has been developed in line with Public Health Advice, the guidance provided by the Health and Safety Authority (HSA).
They have been prepared and shared with the education partners.
This centralised approach was adopted to reduce the administrative burden on schools and enable a consistency of approach across the sector.
a draft COVID19 Policy Document to be updated by each school;
the relevant prereturn to work steps to be completed by both the school management and staff;
the process for the appointment of a ‘Lead Worker Representative’ at school level, as agreed by the Department and staff representatives;
a risk assessment template to identify any risks to be managed at school level (developed in conjunction with the HSA);
various checklists to allow for planning and reopening of schools, including induction training, dealing with suspected cases and cleaning of schools are also included;
Guidance on restricted access to the school facility for persons other than staff and students for essential purposes and limited to those who have prior approval from the Principal; and
Guidance related to the prompt identification and isolation of potentially infectious individuals whereby schools will be required to maintain a log of staff and pupil/student contacts and a detailed sign in/sign out log of those visiting the school facility will require to be maintained.
Where there is a suspected case of COVID19 in a school, the COVID19 Response Plan Guidance also sets out steps schools should take as follows:
Bring the person to the designated isolation area available in each school;
Arrangements to contact parents/guardians in the event of a suspected case in a pupil/student;
Facilitate the person remaining in isolation if they cannot go home immediately;
Supporting the making of arrangements for transport home or if they are too unwell to go home to contact 999 or 112 to advise it is a COVID19 suspected case;
Carrying out an assessment of the incident to determine follow up actions; and
Arrangements for the appropriate cleaning of the isolation and work areas.
Where there is a suspected or confirmed case of COVID19 amongst school staff or pupils, schools need to maintain both staff and pupil confidentiality at all times and must follow the instructions of HSE Public Health.
inform any staff/parents or students who come into close contact with a diagnosed case via the contact tracing process;
contact all relevant persons where a diagnosis of COVID19 is made; and
advise on the appropriate action, on a casebycase basis, that should be taken visàvis the operation of the school.
Measures and Operational Changes to be implemented in Schools
The measures set out in the Public Health Advice are predicated on two general recommendations:
Minimising the risk of introduction of COVID19 into the school community; and
Managing the risk of spread if introduced through:
Regular hand hygiene;
Maintaining physical distancing;
Application of respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette; and
Environmental hygiene.
In terms of Minimising the risk of introduction of COVID19 into the school community, it is critical that people stay at home if unwell.
Nobody should go to school if they are unwell or any members of their household are unwell with symptoms consistent with COVID19.
In managing the risk of spread of COVID19 if introduced into the school community, this section sets out the specific guidance and supports available to schools relating to:
Supporting and promoting good hand hygiene;
Enhanced cleaning regimes within our schools;
Maintaining physical distancing within schools and in the classroom; and
The use of face coverings/masks in schools.
Supporting and Promoting Good Hand Hygiene
Section 5.1 of the Public Health Advice stresses the importance of regular and good hand hygiene as a key control measure to minimise the risk of spread of COVID19 in infection is introduced.
The Public Health Advice provides practical guidance on:
Frequency of hand hygiene;
Measures to support and promote good hand hygiene;
Guidance on hand washing facilities, hand washing products and hand sanitiser.
Schools should carefully consider how best to apply this section of the Public Health Advice on hand hygiene in their school.
In support of this work, schools will be provided by the Department with:
access to training on when to wash hands and how to wash them properly.
posters for display throughout the school to promote good hand hygiene; and
access to hand hygiene products and consumables through a centralised drawdown framework (as described later in this Roadmap).
In addition, in primary schools a focus will be placed on the use of the Social, Personal and Health Education (SPHE) programme as a way to promote personal hygiene including proper hand hygiene for younger pupils.
As noted in the Public Health Advice “Hand hygiene can be achieved by hand washing or use of a sanitiser (when hands look clean)”.
As existing handwashing facilities in schools were not designed for the enhanced level of handwashing envisaged necessary in a post COVID19 environment without significantly impacting on educational class time, funding will be provided to augment hand hygiene facilities in schools.
Given that hand sanitisers can be deployed more readily at entry and exit points of schools and for classrooms, the Department will provide funding to schools to install and use hand sanitisers for each classroom and other key locations (entry/exit points) in their school.
Schools will have access to hand sanitiser dispensers, and the ongoing supply of sanitiser for each school through a centralised drawdown framework.
The framework will be available for drawdown from early August and detailed guidance will issue to schools on how to use it.
The above measures will be important elements in ensuring that best practice in hand hygiene is applied in schools.
Enhanced Cleaning Regimes in our Schools
In line with the Public Health Advice, more regular and enhanced cleaning regimes will need to be implemented in each school to manage the risk of introduction and spread of COVID19.
Section 5.5 and 5.6 of the Public Health Advice provides relevant guidance to schools on effective school cleaning including:
steps to be taken before reopening the school;
how to clean;
the options for both routine and post COVID19 case cleaning for surfaces, toilets and equipment;
guidance on cleaning of shared equipment in schools such as musical instruments, art materials, electronic and sports equipment.
guidance on how to manage cleaning of toys for young children and for the care of equipment and aids for pupils with special educational needs;
the PPE to be used for cleaning in schools as well as the waste management treatment of materials resulting from routine cleaning and post COVID19 cases.
that each setting in a school should be cleaned at least once per day and where there is access to additional cleaning support during school hours it should be focused on frequently touched objects and surfaces; and
the cleaning steps that should take place in a school room where an individual with suspected or confirmed COVID19 was present as well as the arrangements needed for communal areas the person may have visited/used.
In support of schools implementing this enhanced cleaning regime in line with the Public Health Advice and the COVID19 Response Plan, schools will be provided with:
A template checklist within the COVIDResponse Plan related to cleaning;
A module in the Induction Training Programme which focuses on cleaning; and
A COVID19 capitation grant to fund the cost of enhanced cleaning regimes within schools.
Maintaining Physical Distancing in Schools
The Public Health Advice sets out the
“..the principle of distancing can be usefully applied in the school setting, allowing for some flexibility when needed whilst noting that it must be applied in a practical way, recognising that the learning environment cannot be dominated by a potentially counterproductive focus on this issue”.
In terms of maintaining physical distancing, measures outlined in the Public Health Advice fall into two broad categories:
Increasing separation;
Decreasing interaction between students themselves, between students and staff and between staff when they are together;
the implementation of physical distancing will look different across the various ages and stages of learning;
care should be taken to avoid generating tension or potential conflict and some flexibility in the implementation of measures may be required at times; and
staff will not always be able to maintain physical distance from their students and it is not appropriate that they would be expected to do so where this could have a detrimental impact on the student or the learning and health and safety of other students.
Given that each school setting is different in terms of (i) location; (ii) physical layout (iii) available space within the school; and (iv) student numbers
schools themselves are best placed to decide on the appropriate reconfigurations / operational changes necessary to maintain physical distancing.
Section 5.3 of the Public Health Advice outlines the practical measures that should be considered and, if appropriate, implemented in schools at both primary and post primary level.
The implementation of physical reconfiguration measures in schools, allied to the additional supports set out later in this Roadmap, provide the operational means through which physical distancing within schools can be maintained.
Specific additional guidance on the matter on maintaining physical distancing within the classroom at both primary and post primary level is set out below.
Maintaining physical distance in the classroom Primary
The Public Health Advice sets out the guidelines for maintaining physical distance in the classroom as primary level:
A distance of 1 metre should be maintained between desks or between individual pupils.
It is recognised that younger children are unlikely to maintain physical distancing indoors.
Therefore, achieving this recommendation in the first 4 years of primary school, is not a prerequisite to reopening a primary school for all pupils.
Where possible, workstations should be allocated consistently to the same staff and children rather than having spaces that are shared.
The risk of spread of infection may be reduced by structuring pupils and their teachers into Class Bubbles (i.e.
a class grouping which stays apart from other classes as much as possible) and discrete groups or ‘Pods’ within those class bubbles, to the extent that this is practical.
If a class is divided into Pods, there should be at least 1m distance between individual Pods within the Class Bubble and between individuals in the pod, whenever possible.
Generally speaking the objective is to limit contact and sharing of common facilities between people in different Class Bubbles (and Pods within those Class Bubbles) as much as possible, rather than to avoid all contact between Pods, as the latter will not always be possible.
The aim of the system within the school, is that each class grouping mix only with their own class from arrival at school in the morning until departure at the end of the school day.
The Pods within those Class Bubbles is an additional measure, to limit the extent of close contact within the Class Bubble.
Pod sizes should be kept as small as is likely to be reasonably practical in the specific classroom context.
To the greatest extent possible, pupils and teaching staff should consistently be in the same Class Bubbles although this will not be possible at all times.
Different Class Bubbles should where possible have separate breaks and meal times or separate areas at break or meal times [or this could be different class years i.e.
Sharing educational material between Pods should be avoided/minimised where possible.
Staff members who move from class bubble to class bubble should be limited as much as possible
To maintain physical distancing in the classroom, primary schools and special schools should:
Reconfigure class spaces to maximise physical distancing
Utilise and reconfigure all available space in the school in order to maximise physical distancing
To support primary schools and special schools in the implementation of physical distancing in the classroom, the Department has developed a suite of illustrative classroom layouts of potential options (including arrangements for special classes) which are in accordance with the public health advice, and assumes
Room is clear of any unnecessary furniture/shelves etc. on the walls
A variety of classroom sizes.
A link to the suite of illustrative primary classroom layouts is available here.
Funding will be provided under the enhanced minor works grant to facilitate this classroom reconfiguration works.
This funding will be provided to schools by mid August.
Maintaining physical distance in the classroom Post Primary
In implementing the public health advice within post primary school classrooms, it is acknowledged that each school setting is different in terms of (i) location; (ii) physical layout (iii) available space within the school; (iv) student numbers; (v) class configuration; and (vi) ease of potential access to space outside the school.
In recognition that a ‘one size fits all’ approach would not be appropriate as schools themselves are best placed to decide on the appropriate configuration for their school, the Department has developed a Framework to maintain Physical Distancing in the Classroom in Post Primary Schools with a full return of all Students for the 2020/21 School Year.
The Framework sets out a suite of available measures that must be implemented at individual school level to the greatest possible extent.
The suite of measures set out in the Framework are:
Reconfigure class spaces to maximise physical distancing;
Utilising and reconfiguring all available space in the school in order to maximise physical distancing;
Reconfiguring Classes;
Consider Use of Live Streaming within the School; and
Accessing available spaces within the local community
These suite of measures provides a practical framework for schools to use to maintain physical distancing in the classroom with the full return of all students for the 2020/21 school year.
In exceptional circumstances, where notwithstanding the application of these measures, physical distancing by organisational means for a larger class proves not to be possible, then the school must consider the use of face covering/visors in that larger class.
This exceptional measure should be kept continually under review by the school, who should continue to make every effort to devise an alternative solution using the measures set out at 1 to 6 above.
Staff or students who cannot wear face coverings or visors for health reasons should be based in other classrooms or areas wherever possible.
Students should not be required to wear face coverings or visors for the duration of the whole school day.
A link to the Framework to maintain Physical Distancing in the Classroom in Post Primary Schools with a full return of all Students for the 2020/21 School Year can be found here.
Use of Face Coverings/Masks within Schools
On the use of face coverings/masks in schools, the Public Health Advice states that:
“Nonmedical masks may reduce transmission from individuals who are shedding the virus.
However, the extent of this benefit is unknown (especially in children) and would only be potentially beneficial if done properly.
It is not practical for many students to wear a mask properly for the duration of a school day.
Cloth face coverings are not suitable for children under the age of 13 and anyone who:
has trouble breathing
is unconscious or incapacitated
is unable to remove it without help
has special needs and who may feel upset or very uncomfortable wearing the face covering
Older students should not be requested to wear a facial covering but those who may wish to wear a facial covering where physical distancing is difficult to maintain should not be discouraged.
It is essential that those wearing a cloth face covering understand
The purpose is not to protect themselves but to reduce onward transmission and the benefit is reliant on ensuring the mask is worn appropriately see guidance on mask wearing
Wearing a face covering or mask does not negate the need to stay at home if symptomatic.
It is not a teachers responsibility to enforce mask use by pupils
In line with the Public Health Advice, the use of face coverings/masks by pupils in primary schools by pupils should not occur.
In post primary schools, the use of face coverings/masks by students may be a feature where:
The student themselves wishes to wear a facial covering in circumstances where physical distancing is difficult to maintain within the school; and/or
In the exceptional circumstances, where notwithstanding the application of the measures in the Framework to maintain Physical Distancing in the Classroom in Post Primary Schools with a full return of all Students for the 2020/21 School Year, physical distancing by organisational means for a larger class proves not to be possible.
Additional Supports Available to Schools
The Department is providing capital and current funding now of an additional €377 million to support the safe and sustainable reopening of schools under the Roadmap.
Further funding for school costs related to hand hygiene measures and PPE needs under the COVID19 Response Plan, will be confirmed post the establishment of the drawdown framework of suppliers, which schools will have access to, described at the end of this section.
In providing these additional supports, the Department is conscious that schools need to have certainty that what is provided not only allows them to reopen safely but to remain open.
The Department recognises that given the size and scale of the schools system and the inherent differences between primary, and post primary schools and the particular challenges for special schools and special classes, that a “one size fits all” approach would not be appropriate and schools should be provided with some flexibility to manage the suite of resources now available from the Department.
The section sets out the additional supports and measures available to primary, post primary and special schools/special classes.
The range of additional supports available to Primary Schools are:
An enhanced Minor Works Grant to support full implementation of COVID19 response plans;
Employing an aide to help with the school reopening logistics;
Increased management support to schools;
Extending the current pilot supply panel for substitute teachers on a nationwide basis; and
Additional financial supports to provide for additional cleaning, hand hygiene and PPE costs under the COVID19 Response Plans.
Enhanced Minor Works to Support Full Implementation of COVID19 Response Plans
The full implementation of the COVID19 Response Plans for Schools, and the Public Health Advice, may require some reconfiguration works within schools including:
Ensuring that all available space in the school should be availed of in order to safely maximising physical distancing; and
the class space should be reconfigured to maximise physical distancing
Given that each school setting is different in terms of (i) location; (ii) physical layout (iii) available space within the school and (iv) student numbers; individual schools are best placed to decide on the appropriate reconfiguration works for their school.
To support this work, a once off enhanced minor works grant will paid to all primary schools by midAugust.
By providing funding to schools in this way, schools will have the necessary flexibility to implement necessary physical measures in their school quickly in compliance with the Public Health Advice and this Roadmap.
The Minor Works Grant is based on a flat rate of €5,500 plus a per capita rate of €18.50 for each pupil (€74 in the case of pupils in special schools or special classes).
The enhanced element of the minor work grant will match this (therefore doubling the minor works grant to schools).
The table below provides an illustrative example of the value of the minor works grant for primary schools of various sizes.
Current Minor Works Grant
Enhanced COVID 19 element
Total Minor Works Grant
Calculations in this table based on number of mainstream pupils only;
Employing an aide to help with school reopening logistics
Funding will be provided to primary schools to employ an aide to assist with the physical and logistical arrangements necessary for school reopening including movement of furniture, setting up hand sanitising stations, signage, training, engaging with parents and Funding will be provided to each primary school on a sliding scale to facilitate this work.
The level of funding is based on the size of the schools and is set out in the following table:
Increased Management Supports to Schools
The Department is providing funding for 1 release day per week for teaching principals and for those primary schools with an admin principal, there will also be release days for the deputy principal.
This additional provision is set out in the tables below.
Cavan Cavan
Clare Ennis
Clare Kilrush
Cork Cobh
Cork Mitchelstown
Cork Mallow
Cork Ballincollig
Cork Cork City North
Cork Cork city Centre
Donegal Letterkenny
Donegal Donegal
Donegal Buncrana
Dublin Dublin city centre
Galway Galway City
Kerry Tralee
Kerry Killarney
Kildare Maynooth
Kildare Athy
Kildare Leixlip
Kildare Kildare Town
Kilkenny Kilkenny City
Laois Portarlington
Laois Portlaoise
Leitrim Carrick On Shannon
Limerick Castletroy
Limerick Newcastlewest
Longford Longford
Louth Dundalk
Louth Drogheda
Mayo Claremorris
Mayo Castlebar
Mayo Ballina
Meath Ashbourne
Meath Navan
Monaghan Monaghan
Offaly Tullamore
Offaly Edenderry
Roscommon Roscommon
Sligo Sligo
Tipperary Nenagh
Tipperary Thurles
Tipperary Clonmel
Waterford Waterford
Waterford Dungarvan
Westmeath Athlone
Westmeath Mullingar
Wexford Wexford
Wexford Enniscorthy
Wicklow Arklow
Wicklow Bray
Wicklow Blessington
Additional Financial supports to schools to cover additional cleaning, hand hygiene and PPE costs
To support the implementation of enhanced cleaning regimes in schools, a COVID19 capitation payment will be used as the mechanism to support the implementation of enhanced cleaning regimes in Primary schools, including special schools and special classes, with close to an additional €40 million for this purpose.
This will be provided on a sliding scale in line with pupil enrolments.
Enhanced support will be provided for special schools and classes.
Examples of the amount payable to schools of various sizes is provided in the table below.
Primary schools supplemental COVID19 Grant for cleaning costs
The COVID19 capitation grant will also be the mechanism through which additional funding will be provided to cater for school costs related to hand hygiene measures and PPE requirements under the COVID19 Response Plan.
Additional provision for this purpose will be confirmed with the establishment of the drawdown framework of suppliers described later in this section.
Additional Support for Post Primary Schools
The range of additional supports available to post primary schools are:
A new Minor Works Grant to post primary schools to support full implementation of COVID19 response plans;
Employing an aide to help with the school reopening logistics;
1,080 additional teaching posts including 120 guidance posts;
Enhanced supervision supports; and
Additional financial supports to schools to cover additional cleaning, hand hygiene and PPE costs under COVID19 Response Plans.
A new Minor Works Grant to Post Primary School to Support Full Implementation of COVID19 Response Plans
The full implementation of the COVID19 Response Plans for Schools, and the Public Health Advice, may require some reconfiguration works within schools including: Ensuring that all available space in the school should be availed of in order to safely maximising physical distancing; and
the class space should be reconfigured to maximise physical distancing
Given that each school setting is different in terms of (i) location; (ii) physical layout (iii) available space within the school and (iv) student numbers; individual schools are best placed to decide on the appropriate reconfiguration works for their school.
To support this work, a new once off minor works grant will paid to all eligible post primary schools by midAugust.
By providing funding to schools in this way, schools will have necessary flexibility to implement necessary physical measures in their school quickly in compliance with the Public Health Advice and this Roadmap.
The Minor Works grant is based on a flat rate of €10,000 per school plus a per capita rate of €100 for each student (€400 in the case of students in special classes).
The table below provides an illustrative example of the value of the minor works grant for post primary schools of various sizes.
Employing an aide to help with school reopening logistics
Funding will be provided to post primary schools to employ an aide, similar to an examination aide, to assist with the physical and logistical arrangements necessary for school reopening including movement of furniture, setting up hand sanitising stations, signage, training, engaging with parents and staff etc.
Funding will be provided to each post primary school on a sliding scale to facilitate this work.
The level of funding is based on the size of the schools and is set out in the following table:
1,000 Additional Teaching Posts
The Department is making over 1,000 additional teaching posts available to post primary schools in the free scheme.
Posts equivalent to 0.6 PTR reduction will be allocated based as normal on school enrolments and will be clearly identifiable in the school’s staffing schedule.
This allocation will support the important work of teaching and learning and provide additional teachers needed to support teacher substitution, management of physical distancing requirements by reallocating class timetables in schools to smaller groups class sizes where necessary.
These posts will also provide for management supports.
Approximately 120 posts will also be provided for guidance to support student wellbeing recognising the particular importance for this support in the context of the Covid19 pandemic challenges.
These posts will bring guidance provision in schools back to the level last seen before the financial crises.
Schools will have flexibility to consider how best to align this resource allocation within the objectives of the School’s Guidance Plan.
It is also recognised that at an individual school level, notwithstanding the range of measures including the framework to support physical distancing and the teaching and management allocation referenced here, that some challenges may remain to allow a post primary school to fully reopen safely.
The Department is making available a number of posts to support these schools and relevant details will be included in circular letters to schools.
Enhanced Supervision Supports
€40m funding is being provided for additional supervision to support the management of physical distancing in post primary schools (such as ensuring the careful movement of students to classes for specialist subjects where it is neither practical nor possible to remain in the classroom).
An additional funding allocation will be provided to schools to support this work and will be on a sliding scale to reflect pupil enrolments.
Examples of the amount payable to schools of various sizes is provided in the table below.
Post Primary Schools Supplemental COVID19 Grant for Substitution & Supervision
Additional Financial supports to schools to cover additional cleaning, hand hygiene and PPE costs
€12.4m will be provided to schools for enhanced cleaning to reduce the risk of spread of COVID19 in schools.
The COVID19 capitation payment will be used as the mechanism to support the implementation of enhanced cleaning regimes in schools with an additional €12.4m will be provided to schools for this purpose.
This will be provided on a sliding scale in line with pupil enrolments and specific additional supports will be provided for special schools and classes.
Examples of the amount payable to schools of various sizes is provided in the table below.
Post Primary schools supplemental Covid Grant for cleaning costs
The COVID19 capitation grant will also be the mechanism through which additional funding will be provided to cater for school costs related to hand hygiene measures and PPE requirements under the COVID19 Response Plan.
Additional provision for this purpose will be confirmed to schools with the establishment of the drawdown framework of suppliers described later in this section.
Additional Support to Special Schools and for Special Classes
The Department is making additional provision for special schools and special classes in recognition of the particular challenges that these schools and classes will face dealing with children with complex medical and care needs.
Additional NEPS psychologists will be appointed to provide enhanced services to support the wellbeing of our school communities at this time, with a particular emphasis on the wellbeing of our special school communities.
Special schools will receive funding equivalent to 10 days, for the purposes of employing an aide to assist with the logistics for preparing for reopening.
To support this work, a once off enhanced minor works grant will paid to all schools by midAugust.
By providing funding to schools in this way, schools will have necessary flexibility to implement necessary physical measures in their school quickly in compliance with the Public Health Advice and this Roadmap.
Enhanced per capita rates apply for pupils attending a special school or attending a special class attached to a mainstream school Special schools.
Those schools with admin Deputy Principals will be provided with 16 release days.
The Department is also supporting the replacement of all absences of SNAs in school settings.
Enhanced COVID19 rates are payable in respect of students attending special schools and special classes attached to mainstream schools to assist with the extra costs associated with the cleaning of classrooms with a small number of students, operating specialist provision.
Primary Schools Supplemental Covid19 Grant funding for cleaning costs in Special Schools
The COVID19 capitation grant will also be the mechanism through which additional funding will be provided to cater for costs related to hand hygiene measures and PPE requirements under the COVID19 Response Plan.
Additional provision for this purpose will be confirmed with the establishment of the drawdown framework of suppliers described later in this section.
Access to Procurement Framework & Funding to support Hand Hygiene & PPE Needs within Schools
To ensure access for schools, on a value for money basis, to a secure supply chain for any Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), Consumables and Equipment associated with COVID19 Response Plans, the Department is in the final stages of establishing a drawdown framework of suppliers of such products.
It is expected that this multisupplier arrangement will be available to schools to access from early August.
Under the drawdown framework, schools will be able to choose a supplier from the framework and the products which best suit their needs.
It is intended that order from schools will be processed within a very short timeline and delivered directly to schools.
Accompanying guidelines to schools on the accessing the framework will issue in early August.
All PPE, consumables and equipment requirements of schools under this Roadmap and with schools COVID19 Response Plans, and in line with the Public Health Advice, will be available through the Framework.
Hand sanitiser dispensers;
Hand sanitiser liquid;
Hand soap;
Disposable Paper Towels;
Wipes;
Gloves;
Face masks
Face coverings/visors;
Aprons; and
Detergents etc.
The funding to cover school costs will be by way of a COVID19 capitation grant will be issued to schools and will be confirmed with the establishment of the drawdown framework.
Arrangements to Get Children Safely to our Schools
Getting children to school safely has been a key part of planning for reopening schools.
In urban areas, this will mean supporting the NTA in promoting various alternative means for children to get to school in a safe way, including walking and cycling and more generally in reducing the impact on the public transport system of school reopening.
There is intensive engagement with Bus Éireann to carefully plan for the School Transport Scheme and SEN transport, to ensure it is operating within the parameters of public health advice.
School Transport Scheme Services
School Transport Scheme services operated by Bus Éireann on behalf of the Department will fully operate as normal, in line with public health advice, when schools reopen for the 2020/2021 school year.
In planning for normal resumption of school transport services consideration has been taken of the fact that school transport somewhat differs to public transport in that:
School transport services are controlled environments.
Each transport service carries the same children on a daily basis to their school of attendance.
It is a restricted group of transport users which will facilitate contact tracing if required.
Observing hygiene requirements will be a key priority and clear communication to all parents of children or to older students using school transport services will set out the following requirements for those travelling on school transport:
Not to use school transport if they are displaying symptoms.
To maintain physical distancing while waiting for transport.
To always sit in preassigned seating and next to a sibling or child from their class group (this should be the same child at all times).
To use hand sanitizer on boarding the bus.
To observe respiratory etiquette at all times while waiting for and onboard transport services.
To disembark the bus one by one in an orderly fashion; and
With the exception of those children who for medical or special educational needs reasons are not in a position to wear a facemask or face covering, all other students travelling on the postprimary scheme are required to wear facemasks while waiting for and onboard transport services.
With regard to SEN Transport services, these health guidelines will also apply.
Funding supports will be made available to schools for the provision of masks or visors to School Bus Escorts where required, bearing in mind the SEN needs of the child/children on the service, and where physical distancing cannot be maintained.
These will be accessible to schools through the drawdown framework described earlier.
Bus Éireann, in consultation with the Department, is providing information and guidance for their own employees and to contractors contracted to operate on the School Transport Scheme to advise them of:
Sanitisation and additional cleaning requirements.
Use of Personal Protective Equipment for school transport staff.
Measures to take if a child on a service becomes ill or is displaying symptoms while travelling.
Return to work safely protocols.
Supporting the Wellbeing of School Communities
The wellbeing of our school communities is a fundamental element of the Department’s overall plan to ensure a successful return to school as we continue to manage the impact of the Covid19 pandemic.
We are living through exceptional times and this impacts on the wellbeing of everyone in different ways and at different times.
People have been naturally worried about the risk to their physical health and that of their loved ones and have been challenged by the public health measures that were put in place in Ireland to control the spread of the virus, such as staying at home and school closures.
People have an inbuilt capacity to adapt.
This is what is at the heart of resilience.
Most people are weathering this storm and will emerge stronger and with new skills.
Most respond really well to information and practical advice on new ways of managing and staying active and connected.
Some will, for a variety of reasons, struggle a little to adapt and will need greater levels of practical and social support to make the adjustments needed to stay well.
A very small number may find the changes brought about by COVID19 very challenging, and may need higher levels of practical and mental health supports.
We are now preparing for the reopening of schools.
We know that most students, and indeed their families and school staff will be looking forward to going back, reconnecting with school, reconnecting with staff and friends and settling back into school work.
This will be a time of change, with new rules and routines to learn, in order to keep everyone safe.
Some students may feel worried about returning to school, and that’s normal.
Most will however, reengage with little difficulty after an initial settling in period.
Supporting Wellbeing: Essential Elements
The Department has developed and prepared a comprehensive response to supporting the wellbeing of school communities at this time guided by five essential principles for wellbeing promotion at times like this.
A sense of safety
A sense of calm
A sense of belonging and connectedness to school
A sense of selfefficacy and schoolcommunity efficacy
A sense of hope
These principles are widely accepted and explicitly recommended as protective factors to support optimal returning to normalcy and wellbeing in the aftermath of emergency situations.
A tiered model of support is recommended with a strong universal focus, based on the knowledge that people are naturally resilient and most will adapt with the provision of basic practical and empathetic supports while acknowledging some groups will need additional and more intensive levels of support.
In this regard the Departments of Health; and Children, Disability, Equality and Integration; along with their services, will play a key partnership role.
Support provided by the Department of Education will utilise the usual school support structure – the Continuum of Support (Figure 1).
This support structure allows schools to provide universal support for all students, using prevention and early intervention approaches, to support wellbeing and transition back to school.
The Continuum of Support framework also recognises that some students who continue to struggle to settle, despite the provision of universal supports, will require more targeted support, while still others with more complex need will require an individualised approach to support.
The foundation for the provision of a continuum of support in schools, will be the provision of support for school staff wellbeing, and guidance to help them feel confident and equipped to support the wellbeing of their students.
The Department has worked closely with its broad range of support services and agencies2, and with the HSE/HSEfunded services and the Tusla Education Support Service to create an aligned and coherent package of supports and resources to assist schools in this regard.
Supports will include:
A comprehensive communications campaign, delivering universal messages of safety and wellbeing to all
Webpage with access to all information relating to the reopening of schools, including information about wellbeing, with links to specific resources, guidance and support
Wellbeing Webinars for primary/special/postprimary schools supporting wellbeing as schools reopen
Wellbeing Toolkit for Teachers with a range of easily downloadable, userfriendly materials
Services provided by the National Educational Psychological Service, with enhanced focus on special school communities
Consultation and Advice Service to schools
Casework Service in schools
Support and Development Service to schools Professional Learning Opportunities for Teachers
Access to a range of support/resources and professional learning opportunities provided by:
Department’s Teacher Education Support Services
National Council for Special Education Support Service (NCSE) o National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA)
National Centre for Guidance in Education (NCGE)
Tusla Education Support Service (TESS)
Access to additional teaching posts at post primary level, which may be leveraged to support guidance, wellbeing and leadership support
emental health services, including online counselling, provided by the HSE/HSE funded service providers including spunout.ie, Jigsaw, MyMind, Childline and Turn2Me.
The Department’s Support Services/Agencies include the Professional Development Service for Teachers (PDST), Junior Cycle for Teachers (JCT), Centre for School Leadership (CSL), National Induction Programme for Teachers (NIPT), National Council for Special Education (NCSE) Support Service, National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA), National Centre for Guidance in Education (NCGE) and National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS).
Promoting School Staff Wellbeing:
The Department recognises the need for school staff wellbeing and collective self care.
Support for school staff wellbeing will be provided by Department Support Services including the PDST and CSL, as well as by the HSE’s Health Promotion Team.
An Occupational Health Strategy is in place as a supportive resource for staff in schools.
The aim of the Occupational Health Strategy is to promote the health and wellbeing of employees in the workplace, with a strong focus on prevention.
The Occupational Health Strategy comprises the Employee Assistance Service and the Occupational Health Service.
The Employee Assistance Service (EAS) is provided by Spectrum.Life under the logo of ‘Wellbeing Together: Folláinne Le Chéile’.
Under the EAS, employees have a dedicated freephone confidential helpline 1800 411 057 available 24 hours a day, 365 days a year providing advice on a range of issues such as wellbeing, legal, financial, mediation, management support etc.
Where required, short term counselling is available to employees and their families (over the age of 18 years and living at home).
A bespoke wellbeing portal and app which offers access to podcasts and blogs on topics around wellbeing and mental health, family life, exercise and nutrition is also available.
In addition online cognitive behavioural therapy is provided.
As part of the services provided by Spectrum Life a Mental Health Promotion Manager is available to develop and deliver evidence based mental health and wellbeing initiatives to reduce stigma and improve mental health literacy and to increase engagement with the service.
They will also be providing a series of webinars and presentations to promote staff wellbeing in schools as schools reopen and during the upcoming school year.
Guidance on Learning and School Programmes in 2020/21
The Department has worked closely with the National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA), the State Examinations Commission (SEC) and the Professional Development Services for Teachers (PDST) on supporting schools in mediating the curriculum for the new school year.
Curriculum Guidance – General Principles
The Department recognises that curriculum considerations for 2020/21 school year at both primary/special school and postprimary level must take account of the variable learning experiences of pupils/students during the period of school closure, the likely gaps in learning and the practical context in which teaching and learning will be taking place in the new school year.
Provision for curriculum also needs to take account of the likelihood that the impact of school closures on pupil/student experiences has not been uniform.
It is likely that pupils with special educational needs, pupils at risk of educational disadvantage, pupils with English as an additional language and pupils experiencing homelessness or living in direct provision have been the most adversely affected by the lack of classroom contact time.
The Department has prepared a series of guidance documents for schools – for primary schools, postprimary schools, schools providing Transition Year and schools and centres for education offering the Leaving Certificate Applied programme in 2020/21.
The purpose of the guidance documents is to ensure that pupils/students can settle back into school, that all of the school community can stay safe and well and pupils/students can pick up and progress their learning, experiencing as full and enjoyable a curriculum as possible.
The principles underpinning the guidance documents are:
Adherence to the relevant health and safety requirements;
Supporting the wellbeing of learners and school staff;
Ensuring equity and consistency in curriculum provision and pupil/student learning experiences;
Supporting pupils/students where they are at in their learning and providing them with what they need in order to flourish and be successful;
Establishing curriculum and instructional priorities and planning accordingly;
Developing and supporting collaboration with parents and agencies, in order to maximise outcomes for pupils/students in a fair and equitable way;
At post primary level there are additional principles to recognise the autonomy of schools to determine how the curriculum is planned and mediated; and
An approach to planning that is learner centred, balanced, adaptive and responsive to pupil/ student needs.
Primary Level
As most primary pupils will not have been in their school building for a period of over five months, the focus at the start of the school year will be on managing the transition period of returning to school from home.
While the return to school offers a welcome opportunity for children to revive social connections it is also recognised that it will be an anxious time for some.
Schools will be encouraged to allow time for pupils to develop the relationships necessary so that they are available and ready to participate in a meaningful way with their learning.
There is a focus in the documentation on welcoming junior infants to schools and a wide range of resources and support materials have been provided by the Department of Education as well as the Department of Children, Disability, Equality and Integration to support this group.
The guidance outlines the learning approaches which schools should take and the need to allow for revisiting and revising of areas of the curriculum to reinforce and consolidate learning.
Schools will also be required to reprioritise certain areas of the curriculum, especially during the initial weeks of the first term, to give greater time and attention to areas such as Social, Personal and Health Education, Physical Education, Language and Mathematics.
It is intended that as schools form comprehensive pictures of where pupils are in their learning they will work towards a more typical curriculum plans.
Supporting Pupils with Special Educational Needs (SEN)
It is recognised that pupils with SEN will require particular support at the time of transition back to school including supporting their wellbeing, reducing potential anxiety and planning learning experiences that take account of the effect of school closures on their progress.
Approximately 15,000 pupils with SEN will have availed of the Department supported summer provision and all records of progress for these children, whether the programmes were delivered in school or home settings will be available to their schools to support planning for their needs in the new term.
The guidance provides additional strategies to support children with ASD where it is likely that the impact of school closures will have been significant so that learning experiences, routines and sensory needs should be carefully planned.
PostPrimary Level
In the guidance at postprimary level, the Department recognises that welcoming first years and supporting their transition is a critical task for schools.
The Education Passport for these students should have been received from their primary school to assist in planning for their educational needs.
Prioritising curriculum in the key skills at Junior Cycle such as managing myself, managing information and thinking and staying well is proposed to support these students.
Maintaining the same and subject teachers and tutor groups where possible may be considered by schools as an effective way to support other post primary student group transitions.
Schools are asked in particular to be flexible in their procedures around facilitating subject selections at fifth year.
The importance of student wellbeing in the return to school is recognised and schools are required to consider these matters in a “whole of school” and “whole of staff” approach.
Notwithstanding the focus on wellbeing, the Department is aware that some schools are experiencing challenges in increasing the provision for wellbeing from 300 hours to 400 hours at Junior Cycle, so schools can defer the increased provision until the 2021/22 school year.
Assessment for certification
There is significant autonomy in schools in deciding how to sequence and pace learning for students in their schools and therefore the Department does not propose to centrally prescribe adjustments of the curriculum.
It is considered that the most appropriate way to reflect the challenges that have occurred for students in 2019/20 and potentially in 2020/21 is to incorporate adjustments into the certificate examinations in 2021.
Junior Cycle
The number of classroom based assessments to be completed by those entering third year has been reduced and the dates for completion of some elements extended into the new school year.
Detailed arrangements in relation to the Junior Cycle certification examinations in 2021 will be made available before the start of the school year.
The Department recognises that some changes will be required to the assessment arrangements for the Leaving Certificate, Leaving Certificate Applied and Leaving Certificate Vocational Programmes.
A key consideration in making these adjustments is the need to maintain familiarity with the structure of the questions and assessment components for students and teachers.
There will be no need to issue sample papers to reflect the changes.
The changes will be broadly proportionate but may vary, taking into account specific context across modules, subjects and programmes.
In all cases they will involve some combination of:
Students will be provided with greater choice in written examinations; this will be supported through the provision of additional questions and/or adjustments to mandatory sections on written examination papers
The dates on which coursework briefs are issued will be brought forward to allow for additional preparation time for students and teachers
In some subjects, adjustments to the requirements for practical examinations will be made; these adjustments will reflect the need to manage access to equipment to complete the preparatory aspects.
Leaving Certificate Applied (LCA)
The Department’s guidance document sets out the curriculum and assessment arrangements for the LCA Year 1 and Year 2 students for the school year 2020/21.
In the case of LCA Year 2 students it outlines the revised arrangement for the satisfactory completion of modules, student tasks, and final examinations.
Transition Year (TY)
The Department, through this guidance information sets out how much of what is valued in the TY programme can continue to be a central feature in the 2020/21 school year.
The programme is ideally placed to build on progress at junior cycle, allowing additional time as needed to identify priority areas for knowledge and skill development in senior cycle.
It is also ideally suited to the use of digital technology and the guidance identifies ways that experiences in TY can be enhanced through practical planning tips.
It also reminds schools to minimise the costs associated with this programme in the current environment.
Taking account of the loss of inclass time at the end of the 2019/2020 school year, the potential challenges facing schools at the outset of the new school year, and the workload of principals at this time, it is acknowledged that this is not a suitable time for significant curriculum change, particularly at the start of the new school year.
In order to support schools in the practicalities of reengaging with students, a number of key decisions have been taken to pause elements of curriculum change that were due to commence in September 2020.
At primary level the consultation period on the the new primary curriculum framework is being extended to at least end year with completion expected by end Q2 2021.
The effect of this will push out the timeframe for the Primary Mathematics Curriculum and the curricula for each of the other subject areas.
Support for the Primary Languages Curriculum/Curaclam Teanga na Bunscoile will restart in early 2021.
The NCCA will continue to undertake development work in the area of relationships and sexuality education (RSE) and traveller history and culture; and the Department will continue to undertake development work in relation to the Education for Sustainable Development strategy, the Literacy and Numeracy strategy and the STEM education implementation plan.
At post primary level this pause includes the following:
Junior Cycle – Schools were originally required to increase the number of hours of Wellbeing provision at Junior Cycle from 300 to 400 hours from September 2020.
They will now be able to defer this until September 2021.
Senior Cycle – A number of schools were due to introduce new optional subjects from September 2020, including Leaving Certificate Computer Science, Physical Education, and the Leaving Certificate Foreign Languages of Mandarin Chinese, Polish, Lithuanian and Portuguese.
These schools will now be provided with the option to defer implementation until September 2021.
Implementation in schools of the revised specification for Leaving Certificate Art will be deferred by one year to September 2021.
The implementation of a number of new Leaving Certificate Applied (LCA) Module Descriptors will be deferred by one year to September 2021.
Also at Senior Cycle planned consultation on new specifications for Leaving Certificate Irish is being deferred from the second half of 2020 to the first half of 2021.
Consultation on a number of other Leaving Certificate subjects will also be deferred, including Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Arabic, and Latin and Ancient Greek.
Work on the NCCA’s review of Senior Cycle has continued throughout 2020 and it is envisaged that Council’s Advisory Report to the Department will be finalised around the end of the year.
The Department will continue to work with schools to enable them to be agile and responsive in ensuring that pupils/ students can continue to experience the curriculum as fully as possible and to progress in their learning in an online environment in the event of an individual school closure or localised closure of schools.
Additional guidance and online materials for schools in this regard will be issued before the start of the new term.
Provision for Very High Risk Staff and Students and arrangements in the event of school closure in the future
While the Roadmap provides for the reopening of all schools to all students, each school must be ready to:
provide for pupils who cannot attend for health reasons related to COVID19, or a situation where a school may be faced with closure (in whole or part) for a period during which the curriculum will need to be delivered remotely.
The will necessitate an alternative provision approach in both circumstances, with relevant guidance set out below.
Schools will also be provided with resources to replace staff who have been assessed as unable to return to the workplace due to Covid19.
These staff will be facilitated to work from home in line with arrangements that are consistent with the approach of the civil and public service more widely.
This may include supporting very high risk students who cannot attend school.
Supporting pupils at “very high risk” of COVID19
The Department is conscious that there may be some pupils for whom return to school at the end of August may not be appropriate because the relevant public health guidelines indicate they are at “very high risk”.
Responsibility to ensure that these pupils receive appropriate support to engage adequately with learning remains with each school.
Good communication is key to supporting these pupils and to ensure their ongoing connection with their classmates and school community.
Additional supports will be provided for these pupils/students through designated teachers from within the staffing resources of the school.
Schools will have discretion to manage and redistribute their teaching support resources in order to best meet the learning needs of their pupils/students, including pupils/students at ‘very high risk’ to COVID19.
Under the direction of the School Principal the designated teacher should:
Liaise with the class teacher and special education teacher on relevant curricular content and classwork;
Access relevant learning resources;
Provide the pupil/student with individualised support for his/her learning;
Increase the pupil/student autonomy, motivation, agency and wellbeing;
Improve the pupil/student capacity to be become a selfdirected learner;
Support the development of the pupil/student digital competency;
Avail of the communication/learning platform used by the school to ensure ongoing contact with classmates and class teacher.
Supporting Teaching and Learning in the home where there is localised school closure
During the period of school closures the Department provided schools in the primary and special school sector and at postprimary level with a series of “Continuity of Schooling Guidance” documents to help education professionals and parents to support children learning in a remote environment.
The events surrounding COVID19 and the public health restrictions which resulted in the emergency closure of schools to learners has highlighted the absolute necessity for schools to be agile in how they can provide for continuity of teaching and learning in the future.
The continuity of teaching and learning during the emergency period was achieved with significant additional effort from all school staff working remotely to ensure students were supported during this time.
Most schools put in place arrangements to communicate with students and parents demonstrating innovation and resilience by providing flexible local responses.
As a contingency for any such reoccurrence of closures whether localised or at a bigger scale to ensure compliance with any public health restrictions, it is vital that schools are prepared.
The Department is updating its Continuity of Schooling Guidance documents to support schools in responding in an agile way in the event of localised school closure.
Specifically schools will be provided with guidance and support to put in place arrangements to facilitate communication with and between staff, between staff and learners and to facilitate development of online approaches to remote and blended learning in the event that such is required.
In circumstances where there is clear public health advice from HSE Public Health that a school should close, schools will be supported to:
Make best use of guidance materials which were already provided to all schools during the period of school closures and will be further updated to reflect learning during the emergency period,
Alert parents/guardians to where pupils/students are at in terms of their learning,
Develop daily contact lesson activities to be carried out at home for primary pupils
Develop subject specific lessons at post primary level to be carried out at home by students,
Contact parents regularly to offer support and feedback,
Have a system in place to engage with pupils/students daily; and where possible to make arrangements to support students who do not have access to digital technology,
Make best use of digital technologies to allow continued engagement with pupils/students and their learning.
Ongoing Communication Arrangements
The communications for school reopening focuses on ensuring that schools, school communities and all stakeholders have clear, relevant and timely information to support the reopening process and continued operation of schools.
Continued Stakeholder Engagement;
Provision of Support Materials for Schools
Provision of Support Materials for students, parents and school communities; and Direct access to the Department for Schools during the Reopening process
Planning for school reopening has been undertaken in collaboration with stakeholders.
The process has included both meetings of the stakeholders together, and individual bilateral meetings with the department with specific groups on pertinent issues.
The Department would like to acknowledge the constructive and collaborative approach taken by the education partners and wider stakeholders, including other Government Departments and Agencies.
Stakeholders are fully engaged with the Department to develop the shape and design of solutions that are both workable and supported by sufficient and appropriately targeted resources.
A shared goal of all stakeholders is to provide certainty wherever possible, to communicate fully and in a timely fashion, and to have the wellbeing of the school community in mind in all communications.
The Department will continue to engage closely and intensively with education partners and other key stakeholders on the refinement of remaining elements of guidance related to the reopening and operation of schools, and the implementation of the measures set out in this Roadmap.
The Department is preparing and will disseminate a series of materials for schools to use in planning for reopening and in communicating with their communities in advance of schools reopening.
Induction training programmes for school staff produced by the Department – webinars on health and safety, returning to work safely, managing school return and wellbeing.
Tailored training is in development for different categories of school staff: teachers, lead worker representatives, SNAs, cleaners etc.
Guidance and support information on curriculum matters;
Distribution to schools of printed posters with ageappropriate key health messages: hand washing, sneeze and cough etiquette etc.
Provision to schools of digital versions of these for additional supply to be sourced locally if required.
Distribution to schools of the materials for their school communities.
Guidance for schools and ideas on communicating effectively on school re opening to their pupils and families.
Materials to support students, parents and school communities in returning safely
The Department is preparing and will disseminate a series of materials for schools to provide to their returning students and their families in advance of schools reopening.
These will include:
Short guidance for parents at both primary and postprimary level for children’s return to school, emphasising public health and wellbeing information
Ageappropriate communications material for students on returning to school, emphasising public health and wellbeing information.
Schools will be provided with material for distribution, and distribution will also be augmented by the Department using digital channels.
All materials will be produced with an emphasis on wellbeing, accessibility and inclusion.
Schools will be asked to disseminate schoolspecific information to their pupils’ families and provided with templates to do so.
Appropriate use will be made of media channels and gov.ie to ensure that the school community and their families have been reached with the important information that they need in returning to school.
The Department will implement a number of specific communication initiatives to directly support schools in the reopening process including:
A dedicated webpage to enable the sharing of information and updates in an open and transparent manner; and
A dedicated team within the Department to detail with specific queries of schools in relation to the Roadmap, available supports etc.
The dedicated team within the Department will provide a onestop shop for queries of school management on all elements of the implementation of the Roadmap as it pertains to their school.
What will schools be like when they reopen?
Schools will reopen for all students from the end of August.
While everyone wants schools to operate as normally as possible from August this year, it is recognised by all that it will be a different environment to how schools operated in March of this year.
Physical distancing, much less interaction between classes and class groups, staggered breaks and lunch times and a lot of flexibility within schools to maximise school spaces (including the use of PE Halls and GP Rooms as classrooms) will be a feature.
Recognising that there will a broad range of responses when the school community go back to school, ranging from children and their parents being happy and relieved to get back to school to some children being fearful and nervous, there will be specific emphasis on the wellbeing of the school community and our students and pupils as schools navigate through the reopening process.
Specific supports will be also be available for those children who struggle to come back to school, vulnerable groups and those children who may experience loss, grief and bereavement during the period of school closure.
A significant cultural shift in the behaviours of students, their families and staff is expected with each playing their roles in keeping the virus out of their school by ensuring
those who have symptoms or suspect they have the virus stay out of school,
by maintaining best practice in terms of hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette in school, and
as well as by minimising social contacts and respecting physical distancing practices.
As part of the school reopening process, extensive communication by the school with the school community on the specific arrangements that will apply in the school is expected to support their cultural shift.
Reopening our schools is not just a matter of achieving a certain minimum physical distancing.
It is also about getting students reengaged fully with learning, socialising with their peers, and for some preparing for examinations, for others transitioning to school life or a different level in terms of moving from primary to postprimary.
Students will need the support of their families, teachers and school staff in readjusting to school life and physical learning environments again.
School communities will rise to this challenge, and the key themes of the Public Health Advice necessary to keep us all safe will permeate throughout the school community, with everyone:
Applying common sense,
Adopting a balanced approach,
Doing everything practical to avoid the introduction of COVID19 into the school,
Being Aware of
o what we can all do to protect ourselves and each other,
o how to recognise and report the symptoms of COVID19, and o the need to stay at home if we feel unwell, and
Continuing to observe physical distancing, good hand hygiene and good respiratory etiquette.
EPS Education Procurement Service
HPSC Health Protection Surveillance Centre HSA Health & Safety Authority
NCCA National Council for Curriculum and Assessment NEPS National Educational Psychological Service NTA National Transport Authority
PPE
Personal Protective Equipment
SEC
State Examinations Commission
SEN
Special Educational Needs
﻿COVID19 Response Plan for the safe and sustainable operation of Post Primary Schools
What is a School COVID19 Response Plan?
School COVID19 Policy
Planning and Preparing for Return to School
Induction Training
Procedure for Returning to Work (RTW)
Lead Worker Representative (LWR)
Display signage
Making changes to school layout
Update Safety and Risk Assessment
Access to the School and Contact Log
Control Measures
To prevent Introduction and Spread of COVID19 in Schools
Know the Symptoms of COVID19
Respiratory Hygiene
Hand Hygiene
Physical Distancing
Use of PPE in Schools
Impact of COVID19 on certain school activities
Hygiene and Cleaning in School
Dealing with a suspected case
Staff Duties
Absence Management
Employee Assistance and Wellbeing Programme
Appendix 1 Template COVID19 School Policy Statement
Appendix 2 Return to Work Form
Appendix 3 Lead Worker Representative
Appendix 4 Risk Assessment
Appendix 5 School Contact Tracing Log
Appendix 6 Checklist for School Managers
Appendix 7 Checklist for Managing a Suspected Case of COVID19
Appendix 8 Checklist for Lead Worker Representative
Appendix 9 Checklist for Cleaning
A revision of the COVID19 Response Plan for the safe and sustainable operation of Post Primary Schools is necessary to ensure that it is in compliance with the Government’s Resilience and Recovery 20202021: Plan for Living with COVID19 and the ‘Work Safely Protocol’ which has been developed by the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment and the Department of Health with guidance documents provided by the Health and Safety Authority (HSA).
The ‘Work Safely Protocol’ is a revised version of the ‘Return to Work Safely Protocol’ and contains many of the elements and features of the original guidance but is updated to reflect the latest advice issued by Government and National Health Emergency Team (NPHET) to reduce the spread of COVID19 in the workplace.
Each workplace is required to have a COVID19 Response Plan.
In addition to being places of learning, schools are also places of work.
This document sets out the information that post primary schools need to review their school COVID19 Response Plan, including a COVID 19 policy, lead worker representative(s) and process to deal with a suspected case of COVID19.
The purpose of this document is to provide clear and helpful guidance for the safe operation through the prevention, early detection and control of COVID19 in post primary schools.
It provides key messages to minimise the risk of COVID19 for staff, students, families and the wider community while recognising the importance of education for the health and wellbeing of students and society as a whole.
This document focuses on the practical steps which can be taken in post primary schools to minimise the risk of the introduction of the infection into schools while recognising that no interpersonal activity is without risk of transmission of infection at any time.
The documentation and templates in this booklet are supported by the public health advice provided by the Health Protection Surveillance Centre (HPSC) for the safe reopening of schools and educational facilities.
Further advice from the HPSC on the use of face coverings in educational settings was received on the 6th August.
This advice is available here.
One of the key challenges is to balance the need for a practical and sensible level of caution with the need to provide a supportive environment for teaching and learning.
This document identifies the steps schools can take to do everything practical to avoid the introduction of COVID19 into the school and the steps that can be taken to reduce the likelihood of the spread within the school itself.
The Department has worked intensively with the education partners to develop consistent plans, advice, protocols and guidance for schools, including the School COVID19 Response plan.
There is a suite of documentation available to support schools to continue to operate safely and fully including guidance on learning, school programmes and wellbeing for the 2020/21 school year.
There is also information on funding, staffing and resources to schools to support COVID19 measures.
Schools are advised to familiarise themselves with these documents.
All of the documents will be available at gov.ie/backtoschool
What is a COVID19 Response Plan?
A COVID19 Response Plan is designed to support the staff and Board of Management (BOM)/Education Training Board (ETB) in putting measures in place that aim to prevent the spread of COVID19 in the school environment
The COVID19 Response Plan details the policies and practices necessary for a school to meet the Government’s ‘Work Safely Protocol’, to prevent the introduction and spread of COVID19 in the school environment.
It is important that schoolbased teaching and learning and the operation of school facilities complies with the public health advice and guidance documents prepared by the Department.
Doing so minimises the risk to students, staff and others.
The response plan supports the sustainable operation of schools where the overriding objective is to protect the health of staff and students while promoting the educational and development needs of the students in the school.
The COVID19 response plan is a living document and will be updated in line with the public health advice as appropriate for post primary schools.
In line with the Work Safely Protocol, the key to maintaining a safe school requires strong communication and a shared collaborative approach between the BOM/ETB, staff, students and parents.
The assistance and cooperation of all staff, students, parents, contractors and visitors is critical to the success of the plan.
Every effort is made to ensure the accuracy of the information provided in this document.
However, should errors or omissions be identified, please notify us so that appropriate measures can be taken to rectify same.
School COVID19 Policy
A COVID19 policy outlines the ongoing commitment of the school to implementing the plan and help prevent the introduction and spread of the virus.
The revised updated policy will be signed and dated by the chairperson and principal of the BOM/ETB and brought to the attention of the staff, students, parents and others.
A template of a School COVID19 policy can be found at Appendix 1.
Reviewing the safe operation of schools
The BOM/ETB aims to facilitate the continuation of school based teaching and learning and a safe working environment for staff.
The operation of schools must be done safely and in strict adherence to the public health advice and any guidance issued by the Department of Education.
Details for the safe operation of a school facility and the applicable controls are outlined in this document.
Each school will need to review their current processes to ensure that they include the following:
Arrangements to keep up to date with public health advice, changes to any Government plans for living with COVID19 and Department of Education updates;
Arrangements to pass on this information in a timely manner to staff, students, parents and others as required;
Ensured that staff have reviewed the training materials provided by the Department of Education (details at Section 4.1);
Provided staff with access to the Return to Work (RTW) form (details at Section 4.2);
Identified a Lead Worker representative(s) (details at Section 4.3);
Displayed posters and other signage to prevent introduction and spread of COVID19 (details at Section 4.4);
Made the necessary changes to the school or classroom layout if necessary to support the redesign of classrooms to support physical distancing (details at Section 4.5);
Removed unnecessary clutter to facilitate ongoing cleaning of the school taking into account the importance of having educational materials to create a stimulating learning environment;
Updated the health and safety risk assessment (details at Section 4.6);
Made necessary arrangements to limit access to the school to necessary visitors and maintain records of contacts to the school (details at 4.7);
Reviewed the school buildings to check the following after any period of closure:
Does the water system need flushing at outlets following low usage to prevent Legionella disease?
Has school equipment and mechanical ventilation been checked for signs of deterioration or damage before being used again?
Have bin collections and other essential services resumed?
There are checklists in place to assist schools on the details of what is needed for these arrangements in the Appendices of this plan.
Induction Training
All staff will undertake and complete COVID19 Induction Training prior to returning to the school building.
The aim of such training is to ensure that staff have full knowledge and understanding of the following:
Latest up todate advice and guidance on public health
COVID19 symptoms
What to do if a staff member or pupil develops symptoms of COVID19 while at school
Outline of the COVID19 response plan
Staff will be kept fully informed of the control measures in place in the school and their duties and responsibilities in preventing the spread of COVID19 and will be updated with any changes to the control measures or guidance available from the public health authorities.
If a staff member is unsure about any aspect of the COVID19 Response Plan, the associated control measures, or his/her duties, he/she should immediately seek guidance from the Principal who is supported in this role by the BOM/ETB.
Procedure for Returning to Work (RTW)
In order to return to the workplace, staff must complete a Return to Work (RTW) form.
It is available online or from the principal.
A RTW form should be completed and returned to the school before returning to work.
Schools should request staff to confirm that the details in the Return to Work Form remain unchanged following subsequent periods of closure such as school holidays.
The principal will also provide details of the Induction Training for completion by staff and details of any additional health and safety measures in place in the school to facilitate the staff member’s return to the school facility.
There are some school staff who may be unable to return to school.
Current public health guidelines have identified these people as being in groups who are defined as being at very high risk.
This will be updated in line with public health advice.
People at very high risk (extremely vulnerable):
The list of people in very high risk groups include people who:
are over 70 years of age – even if fit and well
have had an organ transplant
are undergoing active chemotherapy for cancer
are having radical radiotherapy for lung cancer
have cancers of the blood or bone marrow such as leukaemia, lymphoma or myeloma who are at any stage of treatment
are having immunotherapy or other continuing antibody treatments for cancer
are having other targeted cancer treatments which can affect the immune system, such as protein kinase inhibitors or PARP inhibitors
have had bone marrow or stem cell transplants in the last 6 months, or who are still taking immunosuppression drugs
have severe respiratory conditions including cystic fibrosis, severe asthma, pulmonary fibrosis, lung fibrosis, interstitial lung disease and severe COPD
have a condition that means they have a very high risk of getting infections (such as SCID, homozygous sickle cell)
are taking medicine that makes you much more likely to get infections (such as high doses of steroids or immunosuppression therapies)
have a serious heart condition and are pregnant
The advice for this group is available from the HSE.
Details of the working arrangements that apply to the very high risk school staff, is in accordance with those applying for the public service generally, and is detailed in the relevant Department of Education circulars available on the Department’s website.
The protocol provides for the appointment of a Lead Worker Representative (LWR) in each workplace.
The LWR will work in collaboration with the employer to assist in the implementation of measures to prevent the spread of COVID 19 and monitor adherence to those measures and to be involved in communicating the health advice around COVID19 in the workplace.
The process for appointment of the lead worker representative in schools has been agreed centrally between the Department of Education and the education partners.
Responsibility for the development, updating and implementation of the COVID19 Response Plan and the associated control measures lies primarily with the Board of Management/ Education and Training Board and school management.
Strong communication and a shared collaborative approach is key to protecting against the spread of COVID19 in schools, and looking after the health, safety and wellbeing of staff and students.
Adherence to the Work Safely Protocol will only be achieved if everyone has a shared responsibility in implementing the measures contained within the Protocol in their place of work.
If a staff member has any concerns or observations in relation to the COVID19 Response Plan, control measures or the adherence to such measures by staff, students or others he/she should contact the lead worker(s) who will engage with the principal/BOM.
In summary, the role of the LWR is to:
Represent all staff in the workplace regardless of role, and be aware of specific issues that may arise in respect of different staff cohorts;
Work collaboratively with school management to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the safety, health and welfare of employees in relation to COVID19;
Keep up to date with the latest COVID19 public health advice;
In conjunction with school management, promote good hygiene practices such as washing hands regularly and maintaining good respiratory etiquette along with maintaining social distancing in accordance with public health advice;
Assist school management with implementing infection prevention control measures to suppress COVID19 in the workplace in line with the Work Safely Protocol and current public health advice;
In conjunction with school management, monitor adherence to measures put in place to prevent the spread of COVID19;
Conduct regular reviews of safety measures;
Report any issues of concern immediately to school management and keep records of such issues and actions taken to rectify them;
Consult with the school management on the school’s COVID19 Response Plan in the event of someone developing COVID19 while in school including the location of an isolation area and a safe route to that area;
Following any incident, assess with the school management any follow up action that is required;
Consult with colleagues on matters relating to COVID19 in the workplace;
Make representations to school management on behalf of their colleagues on matters relating to COVID19 in the workplace.
All staff, students, parents, contractors and visitors have a responsibility both as individuals and collectively to have due regard for their own health and safety and that of others and to assist with the implementation of the COVID19 Response Plan and associated infection prevention control measures.
Full details of the arrangements which apply for the LWR in post primary schools is set out at Appendix 3.
Signage
Schools will be required to display signage outlining the signs and symptoms of COVID19 and to support good hand and respiratory hygiene.
The Department will provide printed posters to schools with age appropriate key health messages – hand washing, sneeze and cough etiquette etc.
Please see link below to these posters which will allow schools who may wish to have an additional supply of posters available.
Any such supply can be sourced locally.
Schools can then arrange to display the posters in prominent areas such as offices, corridors, staffroom area, classrooms and toilets.
Making Changes to School Layout
Maintaining physical distancing in the school environment is recommended as one of the key infection prevention control measures to minimize the risk of the introduction and spread of COVID19.
Further information on how physical distancing can be used in the school environment is found at Section 5.4 below including a link to the suite of illustrative post primary classroom layouts.
Schools should reconfigure classrooms and other areas as necessary to support physical distancing in line with the guidance in advance of school reopening.
Health and Safety Risk Assessment
COVID19 represents a hazard in the context of health and safety in the school environment.
A template risk assessment to identify the control measures required to mitigate the risk of COVID19 in school settings is attached at Appendix 4.
It is important that schools review their emergency procedures involving, fire safety, first aid, accidents and dangerous occurrences to consider any new risks that arise due to the school’s COVID19 Response Plan.
Any changes to the schools existing emergency procedures should be documented and incorporated into the school’s safety statement.
Schools should also review their existing risk assessments to consider any new risks that arise due to the school’s COVID19 Response Plan.
Any changes to the school’s current risk assessments should also be documented and be incorporated into the schools safety statement.
First Aid/emergency procedure
The standard First Aid/emergency procedure shall continue to apply in schools.
In an emergency or in case of a serious incident, schools should call for an ambulance or the fire brigade on 112/999 giving details of location and type of medical incident.
Access to School and Contact Log
Access to the school building will be in line with agreed school procedures.
Arrangement for necessary visitors such as contractors and parents will be restricted to essential purposes and limited to those who have obtained prior approval from the principal.
The Department of Education Inspectorate may also need to visit schools and centres for education to support them as appropriate in the implementation of public health advice relating to creating a safe learning and working environment for all.
The prompt identification and isolation of potentially infectious individuals is a crucial step in restricting the spread of the virus and protecting the health and safety of the individuals themselves and other staff, contractors and visitors at the workplace.
A detailed sign in/sign out log of those entering the school facilities should be maintained.
The school should maintain a log of staff and students contacts.
A sample contact log is available at Appendix 5.
The Data Protection Commission has provided guidance on the data protection implications of the return to work protocols.
Schools are reminded that all school records and data must be maintained and processed in compliance with the GDPR and the Data Protection Acts.
The responsibility for compliance with the legislation rests with each school (or ETB) in their role as data controller.
Infection Prevention Control Measures To prevent Introduction and Spread of COVID19 in Schools
One of the key messages to manage the risks of COVID19 is to do everything practical to avoid the introduction of COVID19 into the school.
If infection is not introduced it cannot be spread.
The risk of spreading the infection once introduced exists in all interpersonal interactions; student student, teacher teacher and teacher student, and must be managed in all settings.
A range of essential control measures have been implemented to reduce the risk of the spread of COVID 19 virus and to protect the safety, health and welfare of staff, students, parents and visitors as far as possible within the school.
The control measures shall continue to be reviewed and updated as required on an ongoing basis.
It is critical that staff, students, parents and visitors are aware of, and adhere to, the control measures outlined and that they fully cooperate with all health and safety requirements.
Staff, should note that they have a legal obligation under Section 13 of the Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act 2005 to comply with health and safety requirements and to take reasonable care for the health and safety of themselves, their colleagues and other parties within the workplace.
Promote awareness of COVID19 symptoms (details at Section 5.1);
Advise staff and students that have symptoms not to attend school, to phone their doctor and to follow HSE guidance on selfisolation;
Advise staff and students to selfisolate or restrict their movements at home if they display any signs or symptoms of COVID19 and contact their family doctor to arrange a test
Advise staff and students not to return to or attend school in the event of the following:
if they are identified by the HSE as a close contact of a confirmed case of COVID 19
if they live with someone who has symptoms of the virus
If they have travelled outside of Ireland; in such instances staff are advised to consult and follow latest Government advice in relation to foreign travel.
Advise staff and students that develop symptoms at school to bring this to the attention of the Principal promptly;
Ensure that staff and students know the protocol for managing a suspected case of COVID19 in school (details at Section 8);
Advise staff and students to cooperate with any public health officials and the school for contact tracing purposes and follow any public health advice in the event of a case or outbreak in the school;
Everyone entering the school building needs to perform hand hygiene with a hand sanitiser;
Visitors to the school during the day should be by prior arrangement and should be received at a specific contract point;
Physical distancing of 2 metres should be maintained between staff and visitors where possible.
Know the Symptoms of COVID19
In order to prevent the spread of COVID19 it is important to know and recognise the symptoms.
High temperature
Cough
Shortness of breath or breathing difficulties
Loss of smell, of taste or distortion of taste
Infection with the virus that causes COVID19 can cause illness, ranging from mild to severe, and, in some cases, can be fatal.
It can take up to 14 days for symptoms to show.
They can be similar to symptoms of cold and flu.
Common symptoms of coronavirus include:
a fever (high temperature 38 degrees Celsius or above).
a new cough this can be any kind of cough, not just dry.
shortness of breath or breathing difficulties.
loss or change in your sense of smell or taste – this means you’ve noticed you cannot smell or taste anything, or things smell or taste different to normal
If you have any common symptoms of COVID19 (coronavirus), selfisolate (stay in your room) and phone your family doctor straight away to see if you need a COVID19 test.
Other people in your household will need to restrict their movements (stay at home).
Getting an early diagnosis means, you can get the help you need and take steps to avoid spreading the virus, if you have it.
For the complete list of symptoms, please refer to the HSE Website.
COVID19 Tracker App
COVID Tracker app is a free and easytouse mobile phone app that will:
alert you if you have been in close contact with someone who has tested positive for COVID19 (coronavirus)
keep other app users safe by alerting them if you test positive for COVID19 give you advice on what to do if you have symptoms
You can download the free app from Apple's AppStore or the GooglePlay store
Respiratory Hygiene
Make sure you, and the people around you, follow good respiratory hygiene.
This means covering your mouth and nose with a tissue or your bent elbow when you cough or sneeze.
Then dispose of the used tissue immediately and safely into a nearby bin.
By following good respiratory hygiene, you protect the people around you from viruses such as cold, flu and COVID19.
Hand Hygiene
Staff and students should understand why hand hygiene is important.
Schools should promote good hygiene and display posters throughout the schools on how to wash your hands.
Follow the HSE guidelines on handwashing:
Hand hygiene can be achieved by hand washing or use of a hand sanitiser (when hands look clean).
Use of hand hygiene facilities including wash hand basins needs to be managed so as to avoid congregation of students and staff waiting to use wash hand basins and hand sanitisers.
There is a requirement for access to hand washing facilities after activities that are likely to soil hands, for example playing outside or certain sporting activities as hand sanitiser does not work on dirty hands.
Hand sanitiser dispensers can be deployed more readily at exit and entry points of schools and classrooms and care should be taken to clean up any hand sanitizer spills to prevent risks of falls.
Warm water is preferable to hot or cold water for hand washing but if the plumbing system only supplies cold water, a soap that emulsifies easily in cold water should be used.
Wash hand basins, running water, liquid soap and hand drying facilities should be provided in all toilets, kitchens and any food preparation areas.
Hand washing facilities should be maintained in good condition and supplies of soap and towels should be topped up regularly to encourage everyone to use them.
Hot air dryers are an acceptable alternative for hand drying but must be regularly maintained.
There is no evidence that hand dryers are associated with increased risk of transmission of COVID19.
Posters displaying hand washing techniques and promoting hand washing should be placed on walls adjacent to washing facilities and can be laminated or placed in a plastic sleeve.
Hand sanitiser is suitable for use for hand hygiene when hands are not visibly soiled (look clean).
Evidence of effectiveness is best for alcohol based hand rubs but nonalcohol based hand rubs can be used too.
When hand rubs/gels are being used in school care should be taken to ensure that students do not ingest them as they are flammable and toxic.
Alcohol based sanitiser must not be stored or used near heat or naked flame
Frequency of Hand Hygiene
Students and staff should perform hand hygiene:
On arrival at school;
Before eating or drinking;
After using the toilet;
After playing outdoors;
When their hands are physically dirty;
When they cough or sneeze.
The Department has arranged for a drawdown framework to be established to enable schools purchase handsanitisers and any other necessary PPE supplies for use in the school.
The Department will provide funding for the costs associated with the hand sanitising and PPE requirements in schools.
Physical Distancing
Physical distancing can be usefully applied in a post primary school setting allowing for some flexibility when needed.
It must be applied in a practical way to recognise that the learning environment cannot be dominated by a potentially counterproductive focus on this issue.
Care should be taken to avoid generating tension or potential conflict.
It is also recognised that it is not always possible for staff to maintain physical distance from students and it is not appropriate that they would always be expected to do so where this could have a detrimental impact on the student
if a student sustains an injury and requires first aid.
However where possible staff should maintain a minimum of 1m distance and where possible 2m.
They should also take measures to avoid close contact at face to face level such as remaining standing rather than sitting beside/crouching down.
Physical distancing falls into two categories:
Increasing separation
Decreasing interaction
Given that each school setting is different in terms of (i) location; (ii) physical layout (iii) available space within the school; and (iv) student numbers; schools themselves are best placed to decide on the appropriate reconfigurations / operational changes necessary to maintain physical distancing.
In recognition that a ‘one size fits all’ approach would not be appropriate as schools themselves are best placed to decide on the appropriate configuration for their school, the Department has developed a Framework to maintain Physical Distancing in the Classroom in Post Primary Schools with a full return of all Students for the 2020/21 School Year.
The Framework sets out a suite of available measures that must be implemented at individual school level to the greatest possible extent.
The suite of measures set out in the Framework are:
Reconfigure class spaces to maximise physical distancing;
Utilising and reconfiguring all available space in the school in order to maximise physical distancing;
Review Timetables;
Reconfiguring Classes;
Consider Use of Live Streaming within the School; and
Accessing available spaces within the local community
A link to the “Framework to maintain Physical Distancing in the Classroom in Post Primary Schools with a full return of all Students for the 2020/21 School Year” is provided here.
You can see a link to illustrated classroom layouts to maintain social distancing here.
Decreasing interaction
The extent to which decreasing interaction is possible in a post primary school will depend on the school setting and a commonsense approach is required recognising the limits to which this can be achieved between students.
In post primary schools physical distancing of 2m where possible or at least 1m should be maintained between desks or between individual students or staff.
As far as possible and practical, students would remain in the classroom and teachers would move between rooms.
As far as possible and practical students would be assigned to a main class cohort which would remain in the classroom for most subjects, with teachers moving between rooms.
Where possible and practical double classes should be planned to minimise movement during the day.
Where students have an elective subject they would move quickly into the new class and would be seated with members of their class cohort, observing as much physical distance as possible.
Hand washing and/or sanitising would be required when moving between classes by teachers and students.
Physical distancing between the teacher and class would be observed.
Where movement of class groups between rooms is required it should be planned to minimise interaction with other class groups.
Limit interaction on arrival and departure and in hallways and other shared areas.
Social physical contact (hand to hand greetings, hugs) should be discouraged.
Where students need to move about within the classroom to perform activities (access to a shared resource) it should be organized to the greatest degree possible to minimise congregation at the shared resource.
Staff and students should avoid sharing of personal items.
Where teaching and learning involves use of keyboards or tablets, the contact surface of the device should be cleaned regularly and hand hygiene encouraged.
Physical Distancing outside of the classroom and within the school
School drop off/collection
Arrangements for dropping off/collecting students should be arranged to maintain physical distancing of 2m where possible.
Walking/cycling to school should be encouraged as much as possible.
Aim of any arrangements is to avoid congregation of people at the school gates where physical distancing requirements may not be respected.
Staggered drop off/pick up should be considered where practical and feasible.
If schools have additional access points, consideration may be given to whether they can be used to reduce congestion.
Students should head straight to their designated learning space/classroom.
A distance of 2m is recommended for physical distancing by staff.
This is particularly relevant to distancing between adults when they are not engaged in teaching such as the staff room and arriving to work.
If 2m cannot be maintained in staff groups, as much as distance as is possible and updated guidance on face covering should be observed.
Physical distancing should be observed between staff members within the staff room through the use of staggered breaks etc.
At post primary level consideration could be given to formation of staff “pods” or teams who work together and take breaks together.
Staff meetings should be held remotely or in small groups or in large spaces to facilitate physical distancing.
Implement no hand shaking policy.
Minimise gathering of school staff at the beginning or end of the school day.
Staff can rotate between areas/classes but this should be minimized where possible.
Ensure physical distancing is applied in canteen facilities
Stagger canteen use and extend serving times to align with class groupings.
Implement a queue management system.
Make sure students clean their hands before and after entering the canteen area.
Briefly passing someone in a hall is very unlikely to contribute significantly to the spread of infection if people do not have physical contact and avoid informal group discussions.
Ventilation
The Department has published guidance setting out the practical steps for good ventilation in accordance with public health advice ‘Practical Steps for the Deployment of Good Ventilation Practices in Schools’ The guidance sets out an overall approach for schools that windows should be open as fully as possible when classrooms are not in use (e.g.
during breaktimes or lunchtimes (assuming not in use) and also at the end of each school day) and partially open when classrooms are in use.
The guidance provides that good ventilation can be achieved in classrooms without causing discomfort, particularly during cold weather.
Use of PPE in Schools
The Department has published “Guidance to Post Primary Schools on PPE consumables and equipment” on gov.ie/backtoschool.
This provides schools with the information needed on the appropriate quantities of PPE consumables and equipment to support the full and safe reopening of schools.
The updated advice from the HPSC to the Department of Education has recommended that face coverings should be worn by staff members where it is not possible to maintain a physical distance of 2 metres from other staff, parents, essential visitors or students.
The Department has accepted this recommendation.
Accordingly, it is now a requirement for face coverings to be worn by staff members where it is not possible to maintain a physical distance of 2 metres from other staff, parents, essential visitors or students.
Please see note re medical grade masks.
PPE will also need to be used at certain work activities or work areas.
These might include roles such as:
Performing intimate care
Where a suspected case of COVID19 is identified while the school is in operation Where staff are particularly vulnerable to infection but are not in the list of those categorised as people in very high risk groups, or may be living with people who are in a very high risk category;
Administering first aid
Parent Teacher meetings
Where staff provide healthcare to children with medical needs in the school environment they should apply standard precautions as per usual practice.
Reception Areas
Consideration should be given to the use of Perspex in reception areas where it is not possible for staff to maintain a physical distance of 2m from other staff or students.
Minor works funding grant can be used for this purpose.
Masks/Face Coverings
Cloth face coverings act as a barrier to help prevent respiratory droplets from travelling into the air and onto other people when the person wearing the face covering coughs, sneezes, talks or raises their voice.
Cloth face coverings are therefore intended to prevent transmission of the virus from the wearer (who may not know that they are infected) to those with whom they come into close contact.
It is therefore a requirement that teachers, staff and students attending post primary schools wear a face covering when a physical distance of 2m from other staff or students cannot be maintained.
In certain situations the use of clear visors should be considered, for example staff interacting with students with hearing difficulties or learning difficulties.
All students on the post primary transport scheme should be asked to wear face coverings unless there is a good reason not to do so.
Cloth face coverings should not be worn by any of the following groups:
Any person with difficulty breathing
Any person who is unconscious or incapacitated
Any person who is unable to remove the facecovering without assistance
Any person who has special needs and who may feel upset or very uncomfortable wearing the face covering, for example persons with intellectual or developmental disabilities, mental health conditions, sensory concerns or tactile sensitivity.
All staff and students wearing face coverings should be reminded to not touch the face covering and to wash or sanitise their hands (using hand sanitiser) before putting on and after taking off the face covering.
Information should be provided on the proper use, removal, and washing of cloth face coverings
All teachers and staff should be aware that they should wash or sanitize hands (using a hand sanitizer) before and after helping a student put on or adjust a face covering.
Face coverings should be stored in a space designated for each student that is separate from others when not being worn (e.g., in individually labelled containers or bags).
Cloth face coverings should be washed after every day of use and/or before being used again, or if visibly soiled.
Face coverings should not be worn if they are wet.
A wet cloth face covering may make it difficult to breathe.
Schools should consider having additional disposable face coverings available for students, teachers, and staff in case a backup face covering is needed during the day.
Whilst staff may wish to utilize their own face covering on a daytoday basis, schools should have available a stock of additional disposable or multiuse face coverings, or if appropriate face visors, available for staff in case a backup face covering is needed throughout the day or where required on an ongoing basis.
Medical Grade Masks
Schools must provide medical grade masks in the EN14683 category to all SNAs and teachers in special schools and special classes and those staff by necessity that need to be in close and continued proximity with pupils with intimate care needs.
Wearing a face covering or mask does not negate the need to stay at home if symptomatic.
Gloves
The use of disposable gloves in the school by students or staff is not generally appropriate but may be necessary for matters such as cleaning, intimate care settings or when administering first aid.
Routine use does not protect the wearer and may expose others to risk from contaminated gloves.
Routine use of disposable gloves is not a substitute for hand hygiene.
Aprons
Aprons may also be appropriate in certain circumstances including for intimate care needs or for staff assigned to cleaning an area where a suspected or confirmed case of COVID19 was present.
Impact of COVID19 on certain school activities
The Department will work with stakeholders to provide more detailed advice on certain school activities in advance of school reopening.
Choir/Music Performance
Choir practices/performances and music practices/performances involving wind instruments may pose a higher level of risk and special consideration should be given to how they are held ensuring that the room is wellventilated and the distance between performers is maintained.
Sport Activities
Schools should refer to the HPSC guidance on Return to Sport.
Shared Equipment
Art – Where possible students should be encouraged to have their own individual art and equipment supplies.
Electronics – Shared electronic devices such as tablets, touch screens, keyboards should be cleaned between use and consideration could be given to the use of wipeable covers for electronics to facilitate cleaning.
Musical Equipment/Instruments – To the greatest extent possible, instruments should not be shared between students and if sharing is required, the instruments should be
Library Policy – Where practical students should have their own books.
Textbooks that are shared should be covered in a wipeable plastic covering that can be wiped with a suitable household cleaning agent between uses.
Students should be encouraged to perform hand hygiene after using any shared item.
Shared Sports Equipment – Minimise equipment sharing and clean shared equipment between uses by different people.
Hygiene and Cleaning in Schools
The Department of Education has provide additional funding to schools to support the enhanced cleaning required to minimise the risks of COVID19.
Details of the funding supports will be provided to schools by way of circular and will be updated as required.
The specific advice in relation to school cleaning is set out in the HPSC advice and is covered in the induction training.
This advice sets out the cleaning regime required to support schools to prevent COVID19 infections and the enhanced cleaning required in the event of a suspected cases of COVID19.
Schools are asked to carefully read and understand the cleaning advice and to apply that to all areas of the school as appropriate.
Schools are reminded to take particular care of the hygiene arrangements for hand washing and toilet facilities.
In summary, each school setting should be cleaned at least once per day.
Additional cleaning if available should be focused on frequently touched surfaces – door handles, hand rails, chairs/arm rests, communal eating areas, sink and toilet facilities.
If students are moving between classrooms consideration may be given to appropriate cleaning products being provided to enable them to wipe down their desk, chair and surface before leaving the room.
All staff will have access to cleaning products and will be required to maintain cleanliness of their own work area.
Under no circumstances should these cleaning materials be removed from the building.
Staff should thoroughly clean and disinfect their work area before and after use each day.
There will be regular collection of used waste disposal bags from offices and other areas within the school facility.
Shower facilities shall not be available for use by staff or students due to the increased risk associated with communal shower facilities and areas.
This shall be reviewed in line with government guidance.
Staff must use and clean their own equipment and utensils (cup, cutlery, plate etc.).
Cleaning/Disinfecting rooms where a student/staff member with suspected COVID19 was present
The rooms should be cleaned as soon as practicable possible.
Once the room is vacated the room should not be reused until it has been thoroughly cleaned and disinfected and all surfaces are dry.
Disinfection only works on things that are clean.
When disinfection is required it is always in addition to cleaning.
Person/s assigned to cleaning should avoid touching their face while they are cleaning and household gloves and a plastic apron.
Clean the environment and furniture using disposable cleaning cloths and a household detergent followed by disinfection with a chlorine based product (household bleach).
Pay special attention to frequently touched surfaces, the back of chairs, couches, door handles and any surfaces that are visibly soiled with body fluids.
Once the room has been cleaned and disinfected and all surfaces are dry, the room can be reused.
If a student or staff diagnosed with COVID19 spent time in a communal area like a canteen, play area or if they used the toilet or bathroom facilities, then the areas should be cleaned with household detergent followed by a disinfectant (as outlined in the HPSC interim health advice) as soon as is practically possible.
Dealing with a Suspected Case of COVID19
Staff or students should not attend school if displaying any symptoms of COVID19.
The following outlines how a school should deal with a suspected case that may arise in a school setting.
A designated isolation area should be identified within the school building.
The possibility of having more than one person displaying signs of COVID19 should be considered and a contingency plan for dealing with additional cases put in place.
The designated isolation area should be behind a closed door and away from other staff and students.
If a staff member/student displays symptoms of COVID19 while at school the following are the procedures to be implemented:
If the person with the suspected case is a student, the parents/guardians should be contacted immediately;
Isolate the person and have a procedure in place to accompany the individual to the designated isolation area via the isolation route, keeping at least 2 metres away from the symptomatic person and also making sure that others maintain a distance of at least 2 metres from the symptomatic person at all times;
The isolation area does not have to be a room but if it is not a room it should be 2m away from others in the room;
If it is not possible to maintain a distance of 2m a staff member caring for a student should wear a face covering or mask.
Gloves should not be used as the virus does not pass through skin;
Provide a mask for the person presenting with symptoms.
He/she should wear the mask if in a common area with other people or while exiting the premises; Assess whether the individual who is displaying symptoms can immediately be directed to go home/be brought home by parents who call their doctor and continue selfisolation at home;
Facilitate the person presenting with symptoms remaining in isolation if they cannot immediately go home and facilitate them calling their doctor.
The individual should avoid touching people, surfaces and objects.
Advice should be given to the person presenting with symptoms to cover their mouth and nose with the disposable tissue provided when they cough or sneeze and put the tissue in the waste bag provided;
If the person is well enough to go home, arrange for them to be transported home by a family member, as soon as possible and advise them to inform their general practitioner by phone of their symptoms.
Public transport of any kind should not be used;
If they are too unwell to go home or advice is required, contact 999 or 112 and inform them that the sick person is a COVID19 suspect;
Carry out an assessment of the incident which will form part of determining followup actions and recovery;
Arrange for appropriate cleaning of the isolation area and work areas involved – (details at Section 7)
The HSE will inform any staff/parents who have come into close contact with a diagnosed case via the contact tracing process.
The HSE will contact all relevant persons where a diagnosis of COVID19 is made.
The instructions of the HSE should be followed and staff and student confidentiality is essential at all times.
School staff should be encouraged to download the HSE COVID19 tracker app to assist Public Health for contract tracing purposes.
Both in and out of the school setting (see section 5.1).
Staff Duties
Staff have a statutory obligation to take reasonable care for their own health and safety and that of their colleagues and other parties.
The cooperation and assistance of all staff is essential to reduce the risk of spread of COVID19 and to protect health and safety as far as possible within the school.
All staff have a key role to play.
In this regard and in order to facilitate a safe return to work, these duties include, but are not limited to, the following:
Adhere to the School COVID19 Response Plan and the control measures outlined.
Complete the RTW form before they return to work.
Must inform the Principal if there are any other circumstances relating to COVID19, not included in the form, which may need to be disclosed to facilitate their safe return to the workplace.
Must complete COVID19 Induction Training and any other training required prior to their return to school.
Must be aware of, and adhere to, good hygiene and respiratory etiquette.
Coordinate practices and work with their colleagues to ensure that physical distancing is maintained.
Make themselves aware of the symptoms of COVID19 and monitor their own wellbeing.
Selfisolate at home and contact their GP promptly for further advice if they display any symptoms of COVID19.
Not return to or attend school if they have symptoms of COVID19 under any circumstances.
Not to return to or attend school in the event of the following:
if they are identified as a close contact of a confirmed case of COVID19
if they live with someone who has symptoms of the virus
If they have travelled outside of Ireland; in such instances staff are advised to consult and follow latest Government advice in relation to foreign travel.
If they develop any symptoms of COVID19 whilst within the school facility, they should adhere to the procedure outlined above.
Keep informed of the updated advice of the public health authorities and comply with same.
Cooperate with any public health personnel and their school for contact tracing purposes and follow any public health advice given in the event of a case or outbreak in their school
Undergo any COVID19 testing that may be required as part of mass or serial testing as advised by Public Health
COVID19 related absence management
The management of a COVID19 related absence will be managed in line with agreed procedures with the Department of Education.
Employee Assistance Service
The Department recognises the need for school staff wellbeing and collective selfcare.
Support for school staff wellbeing will be provided by Department Support Services including the PDST and CSL, as well as by the HSE’s Health Promotion Team.
An Occupational Health Strategy is in place as a supportive resource for individual staff members in schools.
The aim of the Occupational Health Strategy is to promote the health and wellbeing of employees in the workplace, with a strong focus on prevention.
The Occupational Health Strategy comprises the Employee Assistance Service and the Occupational Health Service.
The Employee Assistance Service (EAS) is provided by Spectrum.Life under the logo of ‘Wellbeing Together: Folláinne Le Chéile’.
The EAS is a selfreferral service where employees have access to a dedicated freephone confidential helpline 1800 411 057 available 24 hours a day, 365 days a year providing advice on a range of issues such as wellbeing, legal, financial, mediation, management support etc.
The service is also available via SMS, WhatsApp, email, live chat and call back request.
All points of contact for the service are qualified, accredited and experienced mental health professionals.
Where required, shortterm counselling is available to employees and their families (over the age of 18 years and living at home).
The EAS also provides advice and support to managers and delivers interventions to help them deal with health and wellbeing issues in the workplace.
A bespoke wellbeing portal and app is available which offers access to podcasts, blogs, live chats and videos on topics around wellbeing and mental health, family life, exercise and nutrition.
ELearning programmes across mental health, sleep and a range of wellbeing topics are also available.
In addition online cognitive behavioural therapy is provided.
As part of the services provided by Spectrum.Life, a Mental Health Promotion Manager is available to develop and deliver evidence based mental health and wellbeing initiatives to reduce stigma and improve mental health literacy and to increase engagement with the service.
Spectrum.Life also provides a series of webinars and presentations to promote wellbeing in schools.
APPENDIX 1 COVID19 Policy Statement
[School name] is committed to providing a safe and healthy workplace for all our staff and a safe learning environment for all our students.
To ensure that, we have developed and updated the following COVID19 Response Plan.
The BOM/ETB and all school staff are responsible for the implementation of this plan and a combined effort will help contain the spread of the virus.
continue to monitor our COVID19 response and amend this plan in consultation with our staff
provide up to date information to our staff and students on the Public Health advice issued by the HSE and Gov.ie
display information on the signs and symptoms of COVID19 and correct hand washing techniques
agree with staff, a worker representative who is easily identifiable to carry out the role outlined in this plan
inform all staff and students of essential hygiene and respiratory etiquette and physical distancing requirements
adapt the school to facilitate physical distancing as appropriate in line with the public health guidance and direction of the Department of Education
keep a contact log to help with contact tracing
ensure staff and students engage with the induction / familiarisation briefing provided by the Department of Education
implement the agreed procedures to be followed in the event of someone showing symptoms of COVID19 while at school
provide instructions for staff and students to follow if they develop signs and symptoms of COVID19 during school time
implement cleaning in line with Department of Education advice
All school staff will be consulted on an ongoing basis and feedback is encouraged on any concerns, issues or suggestions.
This can be done through the Lead Worker Representative(s), who will be supported in line with the agreement between the Department and education partners.
Appendix 2 Return to Work Form
This form must be completed by staff in advance of returning to work.
If the answer is Yes to any of the below questions, you are advised to seek medical advice before returning to work.
Do you have symptoms of cough, fever, high temperature, difficulty breathing, loss or change in your sense of smell or taste now or in the past 14 days?
Have you been diagnosed with confirmed or suspected COVID19 infection in the last 14 days?
Are you awaiting the results of a COVID19 test?
In the past 14 days, have you been in contact with a person who is a confirmed or suspected case of COVID19?
Have you been advised by a doctor to self isolate at this time?
Have you been advised to restrict your movements at this time?
Have you been advised to cocoon at this time?
Note: if you’re at very high risk (extremely vulnerable) from COVID19 you may be advised to cocoon.
I confirm, to the best of my knowledge that I have no symptoms of COVID19, am not selfisolating or awaiting results of a COVID19 test and have not been advised to restrict my movements.
Please note: The school is collecting this sensitive personal data for the purposes of maintaining safety within the workplace in light of the COVID19 pandemic.
The legal basis for collecting this data is based on vital public health interests and maintaining occupational health and this data will be held securely in line with our retention policy.
Appendix 3 Lead Worker Representative – Post primary Schools
The Work Safely Protocol is designed to support employers and workers to put measures in place that will prevent the spread of COVID19 in the workplace.
The Protocol was developed following discussion and agreement between the Government, Trade Unions and Employers at the Labour Employer Economic Forum.
The Protocol provides for the appointment of a Lead Worker Representative (LWR) in each workplace.
The LWR will work in collaboration with the employer to assist in the implementation of measures to prevent the spread of COVID 19 and monitor adherence to those measures and to be involved in communicating the health advice around COVID19 in the workplace.
The purpose of this section is to set out the provisions in respect of the LWR in schools.
The operation of these arrangements will operate for the 2020/21 school year and will be kept under review by the parties.
This document should be read in conjunction with:
The Work Safely Protocol;
the Guidance and FAQs for Public Service Employers during COVID19;
COVID19 Response Plan for Post primary Schools (available on the Department of Education website).
Collaborative Approach
Responsibility for the development and implementation of the COVID19 Response Plan and the associated infection prevention control measures lies primarily with the Board of Management/ Education and Training Board and school management.
Strong communication and a shared collaborative approach is key to protecting against the spread of COVID19 in schools, and looking after the health, safety and wellbeing of staff and students.
Adherence to the Work Safety Protocol will only be achieved if everyone has a shared obligation in implementing the measures contained within the Protocol in their place of work.
If a staff member has any concerns or observations in relation to the COVID19 Response Plan, control measures or the adherence to such measures by staff, students or others, they should contact the Lead Worker Representative who will engage with school management.
Role of the Lead Worker Representative
Represent all staff in the workplace regardless of role, and be aware of specific issues that may arise in respect of different staff cohorts;
Work collaboratively with school management to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the safety, health and welfare of employees in relation to COVID19; Keep up to date with the latest COVID19 public health advice;
In conjunction with school management, promote good hygiene practices such as washing hands regularly and maintaining good respiratory etiquette along with maintaining social distancing in accordance with public health advice;
Assist school management with the implementation of measures to suppress COVID 19 in the workplace in line with the Work Safely Protocol and current public health advice;
In conjunction with school management, monitor adherence to infection prevention control measures put in place to prevent the spread of COVID19;
Conduct regular reviews of safety measures;
Report any issues of concern immediately to school management and keep records of such issues and actions taken to rectify them;
Consult with the school management on the school’s COVID19 Response Plan in the event of someone developing COVID19 while in school including the location of an isolation area and a safe route to that area;
Following any incident assess with the school management any follow up action that is required;
Consult with colleagues on matters relating to COVID19 in the workplace;
Make representations to school management on behalf of their colleagues on matters relating to COVID19 in the workplace.
What can a Lead Worker Representative Do?
The LWR may consult with, and make representations to, school management on any issue of concern in relation to COVID19.
These include issues in relation to:
Cleaning protocols and their implementation
Physical Distancing
Configuration/reconfiguration of the school facilities, including classrooms, corridors, halls, open areas, entry and exit points, school grounds etc.
Implementation of oneway systems in the school to ensure social distancing including when entering and exiting the school
Hand Hygiene facilities including their location and whether they are stocked and maintained
Hand sanitising
Staff awareness around hand hygiene in the school
Respiratory hygiene
Personal Protective Equipment
At Risk Groups
Visitors/Contractors
Does a LWR have any legal responsibilities?
A Lead Worker Representative does not have any duties in relation to COVID19 other than those that apply to employees generally.
In other words, the LWR is not responsible for the control measures within an organisation, which remains the employer’s responsibility.
Every school will appoint one Lead Worker Representative.
In schools with more than 40 staff, a second Lead Worker Representative will be appointed.
Selection of Lead Worker Representative(s)
The school staff are entitled to select staff members for the LWR position(s).
The LWR(s) represent all staff in the workplace regardless of role and must be aware of specific issues that may arise in respect of different staff cohorts.
In this regard, where a school has two LWRs, the roles should be spread between teaching and nonteaching staff where feasible
All staff are entitled to volunteer for the LWR role and have their name put forward for election where necessary.
The process for the selection and appointment of the LWR(s) is that management will seek expressions of interest from all staff in the first instance.
A template email for this purpose is attached.
If an election is necessary, all school staff members will have an equal vote to select the LWR(s).”
Supports for the Lead Worker Representative/s
The LWR(s) shall be entitled to:
Be provided with information and training in respect of their role [further detail to be provided];
Be consulted by school management on the control measures being put in place by the school to minimise the risk of being exposed to COVID19;
Regular communication with school management on issues related to COVID19; Be informed of changes in practice arising from COVID19 response measures; Have access to any risk assessments prepared or carried out in relation to COVID19 and to details of incidents of suspected COVID19 cases that have been notified to the HSE, where they occurred and any actions taken.
Be provided with the necessary facilities to enable them to consult with employees or prepare any submissions or reports.
These might include access to a meeting room, photocopier, communications and equipment.
Where the LWR is a teacher, the LWR will receive protected time of 2 hours per week from timetable to enable them to carry out their duties in that role.
In the rare instances where the appointment of a teacher selected for the LWR would cause curricular/timetabling difficulties which cannot be resolved, school management will examine internal and external possibilities to enable the teacher’s appointment as LWR.
Where the matter cannot be resolved, management will set out the reasons why this is the case.
In this circumstance, an alternative individual must be appointed as LWR.
Where the LWR is an SNA, 66 of the “72 hours” will be utilised by the LWR to carry out their duties in that role.
Where the LWR is a Secretary or Caretaker, a reprioritisation of duties by school management should be carried out to afford the staff member sufficient time to carry out their duties in that role within the scope of their normal contracted hours.
Where an issue of concern is identified by the LWR (or is notified to the LWR by a staff member), the LWR should bring this to the attention of the Principal.
Action points for addressing the issue should where possible be agreed between the LWR and the Principal.
Staff should be informed of the outcome.
If agreement cannot be reached, the LWR should notify the Board of Management (Chairperson of the BoM in the first instance)/ Education and Training Board head office of the issue.
Action points for addressing the issue should where possible be agreed between the LWR and the BoM/ETB head office.
Staff should be informed of the outcome.
COVID19 Response Plan: plan designed to support the staff and BOM/ ETB in putting infection prevention control measures in place that will prevent the spread of COVID19 in the school environment.
The plan details the policies and practices necessary for a school to meet the Work Safely Protocol, Department of Education and public health guidance to prevent the introduction and spread of COVID19 in the school environment.
COVID19 Response Plans for Post primary Schools are available on the Department’s website.
Labour Employer Economic Forum (LEEF): the forum for high level dialogue between Government, Trade Union and Employer representatives on matters of strategic national importance involves the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, Government & Employers.
Work Safety Protocol: national protocol designed to support employers and workers to put measures in place that will prevent the spread of COVID19 in the workplace.
Safety Representative: Section 25 of the Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act 2005 sets out the selection and role of the Safety Representative in the workplace.
The rights of the Safety Representative are set out in legislation.
(Note: A Safety Representative has rights and not duties under the 2005 Act).
This role is separate to the LWR under COVID19.
Appendix 4 Risk Assessment
COVID19 Risk Template (List identifies COVID19 as the hazard and outlines infection prevention control measures required to deal with this risk)
Hazards Is the hazard present?
What is the risk?
Risk rating
Is this control in place?
Action/to do list/outstanding controls
Person responsible
Examples of Actions
Follow public health guidance from HSE re hygiene and respiratory etiquette
Complete School COVID19 Policy Statement
Return to Work Forms received and reviewed
Induction Training provided Contact log in place
Complete checklists as required: School Management
If there is one or more High Risk (H) actions needed, then the risk of injury could be high and immediate action should be taken.
Medium Risk (M) actions should be dealt with as soon as possible.
Low Risk (L) actions should be dealt with as soon as practicable.
Risk Assessment carried out by:
Who the visitor met (separate line required for each person the visitor met)
Length of time spent with each person in the school
Appendix 6 Checklist for School Management
Composite Checklist for Schools
This checklist supports planning and preparation, control measures and induction needed to support a safe return to school for students, staff, parents and others.
For completion by the agreed person with overall responsibility of managing the implementation of the COVID19 Response plan in line with the supports as agreed with Department of Education.
Planning and Systems
Is there a system in place to keep up to date with the latest advice from Government and Department of Education, to ensure that advice is made available in a timely manner to staff and students and to adjust your plans and procedures in line with that advice?
Have you prepared a school COVID19 response plan and made it available to staff and students? Department guidance and templates provided
Have you a system in place to provide staff and students with information and guidance on the measures that have been put in place to help prevent the spread of the virus and what is expected of them?
Have you displayed the COVID19 posters in suitable locations highlighting the signs and symptoms of COVID19?
Have you told staff of the purpose of the COVID19 contact log?
Have you a COVID19 contact log in place to support HSE tracing efforts if required? (Contact log template attached).
Have you informed staff on the measures and provided a system for them to raise issues or concerns and to have them responded to?
Have you reviewed and updated risk assessments in line with DES advice to take account of any controls to help prevent the spread of COVID19? (Risk template attached)
Have you updated emergency plans, if necessary to take account of the COVID19 response plan?
Have you made available to each staff member a COVID19 returntowork form to be completed and returned before they return to the workplace? (Template attached)
Have you requested confirmation that the details in the Return to Work Form remain unchanged following periods of closure such as school holidays.
Are you aware of staff members who are at very high risk under the HSE guidance on people most at risk (HSE guidance on people most atrisk) and advised them of the DES agreed arrangements for management of those staff?
Have you advised staff and students they must stay at home if sick or if they have any symptoms of COVID19?
Have you advised staff and students not to return to or attend school if they are identified by the HSE as a close contact of a confirmed case of COVID19 or if they live with someone who has symptoms of the virus.
Have you advised staff and students not to return or attend school if they have travelled outside of Ireland; in such instances staff are advised to consult and follow latest Government advice in relation to foreign travel.
Have you told staff and students what to do and what to expect if they start to develop symptoms of COVID19 in school, including where the isolation area is?
Have you advised staff and pupils to cooperate with any public health officials and the school for contact tracing purposes and follow any public health advice in the event of a case or outbreak in the school;
Have you advised staff of the availability of the supports of the occupational health and wellbeing programme through Spectrum Life?
Has a lead worker representative been identified (in line with the process agreed with the DES and education partners) and detailed at Section 4.3 of this plan to help advise staff and to monitor compliance with COVID19 control measures in the school and taken measures to ensure all staff know who the representative is?
Training and Induction
Have you advised staff and students to view the Department of Education’s training materials which are available online?
Have you taken the necessary steps to update your school induction / familiarisation training to include any additional information relating to COVID19 for your school? 22.
Have first aiders, if available, been given updated training on infection prevention and control re: hand hygiene and use of PPE as appropriate?
Buildings / Equipment
If you have mechanical ventilation does it need cleaning or maintenance before the school reopens after periods of closure?
Does your water system need flushing at outlets following low usage to prevent Legionnaire’s Disease?
Have you visually checked, or had someone check, all equipment in the school for signs of deterioration or damage before being used again?
Have you arranged for the school, including all equipment, desks, benches, doors and frequent touched surfaces points, to be cleaned once a day
Infection Prevention Control Measures in place
Hand / respiratory hygiene
Have you accessed supplies of hand sanitisers and any necessary PPE equipment in line with the interim HPSC health guidance from the national framework provided by the Department?
Are there hand washing/hand sanitising stations in place to accommodate staff, students and visitors adhering to hand hygiene measures in accordance with Department guidance?
Have arrangements been made for staff and students to have regular access to hand washing/hand sanitising facilities as appropriate?
Are hand sanitisers easily available and accessible for all staff, students and visitors – e.g. in each classroom and at entry and exit points to school buildings?
Have you made arrangements to ensure hand hygiene facilities are regularly checked and wellstocked?
Does the alcohol based hand sanitiser have at least 60% ethanol or 70% isopropanol as the active ingredient?
Have you informed staff about the importance of hand washing?
Have you arranged for staff to view how to wash their hands (with soap and water for at least 20 seconds) and dry them correctly through the use of the HSE video resource?
Have you shown staff and students how to use hand sanitiser correctly and where hand sanitising stations are located?
Have you displayed posters on how to wash hands correctly in appropriate locations?
Have you told staff and students when they need to wash their hands or use hand sanitiser?
before and after eating and preparing food
after coughing or sneezing
after using the toilet
where hands are dirty
before and after wearing gloves
before and after being on public transport
before leaving home
when arriving/leaving the school /other sites
when entering and exiting vehicles
after touching potentially contaminated surfaces
if in contact with someone displaying any COVID19 symptoms
Have you told staff and students of the importance of good respiratory measures to limit the spread of the virus?
avoid touching the face, eyes, nose and mouth
cover coughs and sneezes with an elbow or a tissue
dispose of tissues in a covered bin
Physical Distancing:
Have you identified all available school space to be used to maximise physical distancing
Have you reviewed the templates provided by the Department of Education which show options for revised layout of school rooms to meet physical distancing requirements?
Have you arranged to revise the layout of the rooms and furniture as per the Department guidelines?
Have you arranged in each room that the teacher’s desk should be at least 1m (and where possible 2m) away from student desks?
Have you arranged in each room that students would be, at least 1m and (where possible 2m) away from each other?
Have you where possible and practicable assigned students to main class cohorts to minimise the risk of infection from COVID19?
Have you arranged the timetable to facilitate double classes where possible and practicable?
Have you advised staff and students that when students are moving to an elective subject they would, where practicable be seated with members of their main class cohort?
Have you made arrangements to limit interaction on arrival and departure from school and in other shared areas?
Have you encouraged walking or cycling to school as much as possible?
Have you made arrangements, in so far as possible, to open additional access points to school to reduce congestion?
Can you provide a one system for entering and exiting the school, where practical?
Have you arranged for staff meetings to be held remotely or in small groups or in large spaces to facilitate physical distancing?
Have you taken steps to minimise rotation of staff between classes where possible?
Have you a system to regularly remind staff and students to maintain physical distancing?
Have you advised staff and students not to shake hands and to avoid any physical contact?
Have you stopped all nonessential travel for school activities?
Visitors to Schools
Have you identified the activities that involve interacting with essential visitors to the school, made arrangements to minimise the number of such visitors and put in place measures to prevent physical contact, as far as possible?
Are there arrangements in place to inform essential visitors to schools of the measures to help prevent the spread of infection?
Have you a system in place for all visitors who do need to come to the school to make appointment, arrange to contact a central point and to record their visit using the contact tracing log?
Appendix 7 Checklist for dealing with a suspected case of COVID19
Staff members will be required to manage a suspected case in line with the protocol and training.
A nominated member of the school management team will be nominated as the designated contact person for ensuring that all aspects of the protocol to deal with suspected cases have been adhered to.
Isolation Area
Have you identified a place that can be used as an isolation area, preferably with a door that can close?
The isolation area does not have to be a separate room but if it is not a room it should be 2m away from others in the room.
Is the isolation area accessible, including to staff and students with disabilities?
Is the route to the isolation area accessible?
Have you a contingency plan for dealing with more than one suspected case of COVID19?
Are the following available in the isolation area(s)?
Tissues
Hand sanitiser
Disinfectant/wipes
Gloves/Masks
Waste Bags
Bins
Isolating a Person
Are procedures in place to accompany the infected person to the isolation area, along the isolation route with physical distancing from them?
Are staff familiar with this procedure?
Have others been advised to maintain a distance of at least 2m from the affected person at all times?
Is there a disposable mask to wear for the affected person while in the common area and when exiting the building?
Arranging for the affected person to leave the School
Staff – have you established by asking them if the staff members feel well enough to travel home?
Student – have you immediately contacted their parents/guardians and arranged for them to collect their student? Under no circumstances can a student use public or school transport to travel home if they are a suspected case of COVID19.
The affected person should be advised to avoid touching other people, surfaces and objects.
The affected person should be advised to cover their mouth and nose with disposable tissue(s) when they cough or sneeze, and to put the tissue in the bin.
Has transport home or to an assessment centre been arranged if the affected person has been directed to go there by their GP?
Has the affected person been advised not to go to their GP’s surgery or any pharmacy or hospital?
Has the affected person been advised they must not use public transport?
Has the affected person been advised to continue wearing the face mask until they reach home?
Have you carried out an assessment of the incident to identify any followup actions needed?
Are you available to provide advice and assistance if contacted by the HSE?
Have you taken the isolation area outofuse until cleaned and disinfected?
Have you made arrangements to clean and disinfect any classroom space where the staff or pupils were located?
Have you arranged for cleaning and disinfection of the isolation area and any other areas involved, as soon as practical after the affected person has left the building?
Have the cleaners been trained in dealing with contaminated areas and supplied with the appropriate PPE?
Appendix 8 Checklist Lead Worker Representative
Have you agreed with your school to act as a Lead worker representative for your school?
Have you been provided with information and training in relation to the role of lead worker representative? (Training for this role is currently being explored with the HSA).
Are you keeping up to date with the latest COVID19 advice from Government?
Are you aware of the signs and symptoms of COVID19?
Do you know how the virus is spread?
Do you know how to help prevent the spread of COVID19?
Have you watched and do you understand the online Induction Training provided by the Department of Education before returning to school?
Are you helping in keeping your fellow workers up to date with the latest COVID19 advice from Government?
Have you completed the COVID19 return to work form and given it to your school? (Department template ReturntoWork form available)
Are you aware of the control measures your school has put in place to minimise the risk of you and others being exposed to COVID19? (Checklist for School Management available)
Did your school consult with you when putting control measures in place? Control measures have been agreed centrally between the Department and education partners.
Consultation at school level should take place on any specific local arrangements necessary to implement the protocol
Have you a means of regular communication with the person with overall responsibility for the school COVID19 plan?
Are you cooperating with your school to make sure these control measures are maintained?
Have you familiarised yourself with the cleaning requirements needed to help prevent cross contamination? (Checklist for Cleaning and Disinfection available)
Have you been asked to walk around and check that the control measures are in place and are being maintained?
Are you reporting immediately to the person with overall responsibility for the school COVID19 plan any problems, areas of noncompliance or defects that you see?
Are you keeping a record of any problems, areas of noncompliance or defects and what action was taken to remedy the issue?
Are you familiar with what to do in the event of someone developing the symptoms of COVID19 while at school?
Are you cooperating with your school in identifying an isolation area and a safe route to that area? (Checklist for dealing with suspected case of COVID19 available)
Are you helping in the management of someone developing symptoms of COVID19 while at school?
Once the affected person has left the school, are you helping in assessing what followup action is needed?
Are you helping in maintaining the contact log?
Have you been made aware of any changes to the emergency plans or first aid procedures for your school?
Are you making yourself available to fellow staff to listen to any COVID19 control concerns or suggestions they may have?
Are you raising those control concerns or suggestions with your school and feeding back the response to the worker who raised the issue?
Are you aware of the availability of the Spectrum Life Wellbeing Together Programme?
Have you been provided by the Principal/ school management with the supports to which you are entitled in your role as Lead Worker Representative?
If you are a teacher, have you been provided with the 2 hours per week of protected time off class contact hours, as provided for in the protocol?
If you are a school secretary or a caretaker have your duties been reprioritised by school management to afford you sufficient time to carry out your duties as LWR within the scope of your normal contracted hours, as provide for in the protocol?
Appendix 9 Checklist for Cleaning
Have you a system in place for checking and keeping up to date with the latest public health advice from Government and the Department of Education, to ensure that advice is made available in a timely manner in order to adjust your cleaning procedures in line with that advice?
Have you reviewed the HPSC interim health advice for the safe reopening of schools, in particular Section 5.6 Environmental Hygiene?
Have you explained the need for the enhanced cleaning regime to staff?
Are you aware that cleaning is best achieved using a general purpose detergent and warm water, clean cloths, mops and the mechanical action of wiping and cleaning, following by rinsing and drying?
Have you sufficient cleaning materials in place to support the enhanced cleaning regime?
Have you provided training for cleaning staff on the enhanced cleaning regime?
Have you made arrangements for the regular and safe emptying of bins?
Are you familiar with the cleaning options for school settings set out in the interim HPSC health advice for schools for surfaces, toilets, cleaning equipment, PPE and waste management?
Are you aware that each school setting should be cleaned once per day?
Have you provided cleaning materials to staff so that they can clean their own desk or immediate workspace?
Have you advised staff that they are responsible for cleaning personal items that have been brought to work and are likely to be handled at work or during breaks (for example, mobile phone and laptops) and to avoid leaving them down on communal surfaces or they will need to clean the surface after the personal item is removed?
Have you advised staff and students to avoid sharing items such as cups, bottles, cutlery, and pens?
Have you put in place a written cleaning schedule to be made available to cleaning staff including:
Items and areas to be cleaned
Frequency of cleaning
Cleaning materials to be used
Cleaning of frequently touched surfaces such as vending machines, coffee machines and door handles
Equipment to be used and method of operation?
Details of how to clean following a suspected case of COVID19 are at Section 7 of the Plan above
If disinfection of contaminated surfaces is required, is a system in place to do this following cleaning?
If cleaning staff have been instructed to wear gloves when cleaning are they aware of the need to wash their hands thoroughly with soap and water, both before and after wearing gloves?
Have you a system in place for disposing personal waste such as cleaning cloths and used wipes in a rubbish bag? The Protocol advises that personal waste such as cleaning waste, tissues etc.
should be double bagged and stored in a secure area for 72 hours before being presented for general waste collection.
Have you ensured there is a system in place to make sure reusable cleaning equipment including mop heads and nondisposable cloths are clean before reuse?
Have you ensured there is a system in place to ensure that equipment such as buckets are emptied and cleaned with a fresh solution of disinfectant before reuse?
Supports from Revenue
Employment Wage Support Scheme (EWSS)
COVID Restrictions Support Scheme (CRSS)
Revenue ‘Warehousing’ of COVID19 related tax debt for businesses
Reduction of VAT Rates
Supports from the Department of Social Protection
COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment
Enterprise Support Grant
ShortTime Work Support
Business Supports – Loans, Grants, Vouchers, Training & Mentoring
Online Retail Scheme
€450m Strategic Banking Corporation Ireland (SBCI)
COVID19 Working Capital Scheme
Additional €500m COVID19 Funding for Future Growth Loan Scheme for SME’s, Farmers and Fishing
€2 billion COVID19 Credit Guarantee Scheme
Microfinance Ireland: COVID19 Business Loan
€2 billion Pandemic Stabilisation and Recovery Fund (PSRF)
Enterprise Ireland Supports
€180m Sustaining Enterprise Fund
COVID19 Business Financial Planning Grant
Local Enterprise Office Support
Trading Online Voucher Scheme
COVID19 Business Loan
Local Enterprise Office Financial Supports
Mentoring
Training and Webinars
Other Government Supports in Place
Reopening Society and Business
Resilience and Recovery 20202021: Plan for Living with COVID19
Supports for Businesses Impacted by COVID19
The Work Safely Protocol
Data Protection: Return to Work Safely Protocol
Health and Safety Authority (HSA): COVID19 Templates and Checklists
HSA Return to Work Safely Online Course
Guidance on Working from Home
Stay up to Date
Call Centre & Helplines
DETE Enterprise Information Centre
Occupational Health and Safety Helpline
COVID19 related prevention and recovery measures in the workplace
Other helpful links
Appendix 1 – COVID19 Business Continuity Checklist
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment – Enterprise Information Centre
The personal and economic toll that COVID19 has taken on every family, community and business is unprecedented.
We have seen businesses throughout the country respond with determination and an ability to adapt in what have been extremely difficult circumstances.
The government must do everything it can to help these businesses reopen and get people back to work.
The July Stimulus will form a major part of our response.
It is our plan to help our country recover, to repair the damage that has been done and to restore confidence and prosperity.
Step by step, we will help businesses get back on their feet.
This document is intended to act as a practical guide to help businesses contend with the challenges posed by COVID19, by setting out all the relevant information in one place.
It includes information on grants, low cost loans, vouchers and training opportunities and I hope you find it useful.
My Department is also operating an Enterprise Information Centre call centre to advise businesses that are affected by COVID19.
The Call Centre can be contacted at
Supports for Businesses Impacted by COVID19
The COVID19 pandemic has presented unprecedented challenges for businesses in Ireland and across the globe.
These circumstances have presented great difficulties for employers and employees alike.
The Government is continuing to address the changing situation and to assist companies and has introduced a range of measures and supports in this regard.
This online, downloadable Guide was compiled to provide a comprehensive resource for businesses trying to manage their way through this current situation.
This Guide contains detailed information on a huge range of supports from this Department and other Government Departments and Agencies.
To ensure ease of access to this information, the Guide is divided into 6 sections and also includes an Appendix which contains a COVID19 Business Continuity Checklist which outlines some of the key risks to businesses as well as preparatory actions that can be taken to respond.
Part 1 highlights the supports available from Revenue, such as Warehousing of COVID19 debt, Reduction in VAT rates, the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS) and the COVID Restrictions Support Scheme (CRSS).
Part 2 provides information on the supports available from the Department of Social Protection.
The supports include the Pandemic Unemployment Payment, the Enterprise Support Grant and the Short Time Work Support.
Part 3 sets out in detail the business supports that are available, ranging from loans to grants to vouchers to mentoring.
These include the €450m Strategic Banking Corporation Ireland (SBCI) COVID19 Working Capital Scheme, Enterprise Ireland supports the €5,000 Business Financial Planning Grant as well as supports from the Local Enterprise Offices (LEOs) like the Trading Online Voucher and the Mentor Programme.
Part 4 of the Guide outlines other Government supports that are available to businesses.
Details are provided on the Commercial Rates Waiver and the Annual Filing of Returns.
In addition, links are provided to other important resources like the NSAI Workplace and Retail Protection and Improvement Guides.
in Part 5 this section highlights the Resilience and Recovery 20202021: Plan for Living with COVID 19, the Return to Work Safely Protocol and the Health and Safety Authority (HSA) COVID19 Templates, Guides and Checklists.
Part 6 of the Guide highlights those websites where uptodate official information is available.
In addition, details of the DETE Enterprise Information Centre, the Occupational Health and Safety Helpline and the NSAI COVID19 helpline are also provided.
As the COVID19 situation changes, Government supports also change to address new difficulties and provide solutions and guidance.
Engage with Revenue
If you have concerns about your ability to pay your tax liabilities speak to the Revenue Commissioners, who have advised:
"On an ongoing basis, Revenue engages with viable businesses experiencing temporary cashflow or trading difficulties that affect the timely payment of tax.
Revenue works very successfully with businesses that engage early to resolve their tax payment difficulties.
Revenue will engage with any viable business that experiences temporary cashflow difficulties, including difficulties arising from exceptional circumstances such as the COVID19 (Coronavirus) outbreak.” Revenue
It is vitally important that businesses affected by the pandemic and unable to pay tax liabilities as they fall due, continue to file their tax returns on time so that they may take advantage of these forbearance measures.
Revenue has also posted advice for businesses experiencing trading difficulties as a result of COVID 19.
This includes information on tax returns, the application of late payment interest, debt enforcement, tax clearance and customs.
For more information, visit Revenue’s COVID19 information and advice for taxpayers and agents and Revenue measures to assist SMEs experiencing cashflow difficulties as a result of COVID19
The Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS), provides a flatrate subsidy to qualifying employers based on the numbers of eligible employees on the employer’s payroll.
The EWSS, operated by Revenue, has replaced the Temporary Wage Subsidy Scheme and is expected to run until 30 June 2021.
COVID Restrictions Support Scheme (CRSS)
The COVID Restrictions Support Scheme (CRSS) offers support to businesses forced to close or trade at significantly reduced levels as a result of restrictions imposed on them in response to COVID19.
Eligible businesses can make a claim to Revenue for a payment known as an Advance Credit for Trading Expenses (ACTE).
An ACTE is payable for each week a business is affected by the restrictions.
The ACTE is equal to 10% of the average weekly turnover of the business in 2019 up to €20,000, plus 5% on turnover over €20,000.
In the case of new businesses, the turnover is based on the average actual weekly turnover in 2020.
The ACTE is subject to a maximum weekly payment of €5,000.
Revenue ‘Warehousing’ of COVID19 related tax debt for businesses
Businesses that have had to close or have been significantly impacted by the restrictions will not be able to enter into arrangements to clear the COVIDrelated tax debt, pay their normal trade and other nonRevenue creditors, make any necessary restructuring to deal with the new trading arrangements in the context of social distancing, build up their stock, etc.
In that context, Revenue will Warehouse Deferred Tax Liabilities associated with the COVID19 crisis.
This will represent a direct support for affected businesses where a commitment to a phased payment arrangement is not possible.
Arrangements will be put in place to allow debt that cannot be paid during the COVIDrelated period, to be warehoused interestfree for a year from recommencement of trading, during which time there will be no debt enforcement action taken by Revenue in respect of the debt.
Prior to the expiry of the warehousing period, the business will be expected to engage with Revenue to reach an agreement on an exit strategy more suited to the specific business needs and the need for continued viability.
The scheme will apply to businesses in all sectors of the economy who have been negatively impacted by COVID19.
For further details please visit Revenue: Warehousing of VAT and PAYE (Employer) Debts
Reduction of VAT Rates
VAT rate reduction from 13.5% to 9%
A VAT rate reduction from 13.5% to 9% applies from 1 November 2020 in recognition of the unprecedented challenges facing the hospitality and tourism sector.
For more information, please visit Revenue: Reduction in the standard rate of VAT
Supports from the Department of Social Protection
COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment
The Pandemic Unemployment Payment is available to all employees and the selfemployed who have lost their job due to the COVID19 pandemic.
Enterprise Support Grant
The Enterprise Support Grant for businesses impacted by COVID19 is available for eligible self employed people who close their COVID19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment on or 18 May 2020.
This will provide business owners with a onceoff grant of up to €1,000 to restart their business which was closed due to the COVID19 pandemic.
ShortTime Work Support
ShortTime Work Support is a form of Jobseeker's Benefit and is a nontaxable income support payment for people who have been temporarily placed on a shorter working week by their employer.
Employees of businesses that need to reduce hours or days worked can avail of the Department Social Protection ShortTime Work Support.
For more information, please visit the Department of Social Protection
Business Supports – Loans, Grants, Vouchers, Training & Mentoring
New €5m COVID19 Online Retail Scheme
The new €5 million COVID19 Online Retail Scheme is open to eligible Irishowned retail enterprises that had 10 or more employees on or before 29 February 2020 (or have grown to this level since then) and have the potential to sustain or create jobs, generate growth in online transactions and with an ambition to internationalise their business in the future.
Successful applicants will receive a grant ranging from €10,000 to a maximum of €40,000 covering up to 80% of project costs.
€450m Strategic Banking Corporation Ireland (SBCI) COVID19 Working Capital Scheme
Working capital is a measure of the shortterm liquidity of a business and finances the day to day running of a business.
This includes cashflow for operational purposes.
Eligibility applications for the COVID19 Working Capital Scheme are accepted through the SBCI website.
Viable and eligible businesses (including sole traders) with up to 499 employees who are exposed to the impacts of COVID19.
Qualify for the COVID19 Working Capital Scheme
To qualify for eligibility to the scheme, businesses need to meet one criterion related to the impact of COVID19 on their business and one criterion related to innovation.
The details of the criteria can be found at SBCI.
loans from €25,000 up to €1.5 million
loan period of up to 3 years
no security required for loans of up to €500,000
competitively priced loans (maximum interest rate of 4%)
you may be able to avail of a 3 month interest only payment period
For more information, see DETE Government Supports for COVID19 and SBCI
Additional €500m COVID19 Funding for Future Growth Loan Scheme for SME’s, Farmers and Fishing
The Strategic Banking Corporation of Ireland (SBCI) administers this Scheme.
Eligibility applications for the Future Growth Loan Scheme are accepted through the SBCI website.
This Scheme provides longer term loans to COVID19 impacted businesses.
Information on the release of lending under this Scheme can be monitored through the SBCI website.
loans from €25,000 to a maximum of €3,000,000
loan terms ranging from 7 to 10 years
no security required for loans of up to €500,000
competitively priced loans (maximum interest rate of 4.5%)
you may be able to avail of interestonly repayments at the start of the loan
For more information, see DETE Government Supports for COVID19 and SBCI.
€2 billion COVID19 Credit Guarantee Scheme
The COVID19 Credit Guarantee Scheme is provided by the Government of Ireland to facilitate lending to Micro, Small and Mediumsized Enterprises, and Small MidCaps adversely impacted by COVID19.
This includes Primary Producers – Agriculture/Fishing.
The COVID19 Credit Guarantee Scheme facilitates the provision of liquidity and working capital to businesses with an initial focus on term and working capital loans.
The Scheme enables a borrower impacted by COVID19 to access credit.
The borrower contributes to the cost of the Scheme by paying a guarantee premium on the credit advanced.
This premium is separate from and is in addition to the cost of the credit advanced.
loans from €10,000 up to €1 million are available for SMEs who would not otherwise be able to access bank loans
loan period of between 3 months to 5.5 years
interest rates will be below market rate
up to 12 months interest / or capital moratoria are possible
Loan Amounts =<€250,000 will be unsecured (unless it is a requirement of the product feature e.g. asset finance, invoice discount facilities).
Microfinance Ireland: COVID19 Business Loan
The COVID19 Business Loan from Microfinance Ireland is a government initiative to support micro enterprises, through the current period of uncertainty, who are or may be impacted by the coronavirus in Ireland.
Microenterprises (including sole traders, partnerships or limited companies) employing less than 10 full time employees and with a turnover of less than €2 million per annum, who are finding it difficult to access finance through banks and other commercial lenders and experiencing a negative impact on their business from COVID19 that equates to a minimum of 15% of actual or projected turnover or profit in the business.
business loans between €5,000 and €25,000 for eligible microenterprises
loans may be used for working capital and required business changes as a result of COVID19
loan terms up to 3 years (shorter if appropriate)
the terms include a six months interest free and repayment free moratorium, with the loan to then be repaid over the remaining 30 months of the 36month loan period.
interest rate of 4.5% if an application is submitted through a Local Enterprise Office.
5.5% if submitted directly to Microfinance Ireland
no fees and/or hidden costs with fixed repayments and with no penalty for early repayment
For more information, please visit DETE Government Supports for COVID19, and Microfinance Ireland
€2 billion Pandemic Stabilisation and Recovery Fund (PSRF)
The Ireland Strategic Investment Fund (ISIF) will make available a €2 billion fund to support medium and large enterprises in Ireland affected by COVID19.
This fund, to be known as the Pandemic Stabilisation and Recovery Fund (PSRF), will have €2 billion in total capital and will be made available through a subportfolio within ISIF.
The PSRF will focus on investment in large and medium enterprises employing more than 250 employees or with annual turnover in excess of €50 million.
ISIF may consider investing in enterprises below these levels if they are assessed to be of substantial scale and of significant importance at national or regional level.
the fund will act as an accelerator, investing on a commercial basis in businesses that can meet the investment requirements and can use ISIF investment to return to longterm viability.
investments can be across the range of instruments from senior debt, hybrid instruments to equity, and can be tailored to take account of the particular circumstances of each investee.
This will enable businesses to access the capital they need in the most appropriate form that best suits their individual needs.
in making investments, ISIF will seek to maximise the quantum of additional capital that the investee business can access from its existing shareholders and banks, from potential new co investors and from European sources (such as the European Investment Bank), thereby minimising the amount of ISIF capital that may be needed.
For more information, please visit Pandemic Stabilisation and Recovery Fund
Enterprise Ireland Supports
€180m Sustaining Enterprise Fund
An EU approved €180 million Sustaining Enterprise Fund in line with EU State Aid rules, has been established to provide financial support to Irish companies affected by the coronavirus outbreak.
The fund will be administered by Enterprise Ireland as part of a suite of emergency supports to help Irish companies that are seriously and adversely affected by the COVID19 pandemic.
This support is available to assist companies with 10 or more employees to access the necessary liquidity and funding to sustain their businesses in the short to medium term.
The Scheme operates as an additional support to the Strategic Banking Corporation of Ireland (SBCI) COVID19 Working Capital Scheme and supports available from banks and other financial providers.
The Sustaining Enterprise Fund of up to €180m is open to eligible companies that:
employ 10 or more fulltime employees
are operating in the manufacturing and internationally traded services sectors
for SMEs have applied for funding from a financial institution, including, where appropriate, through the SBCI COVID19 Working Capital Loan Scheme
for large companies – have completed a formal application process for funding with an appropriate financial institution.
a nonrepayable grant of up to 50% of a funding package (up to €200,000) is available now
funding of between €100,000 and €800,000 available
no repayments for the first 3 years
businesses qualifying under this EU supported scheme will be offered a Repayable Advance of up to €800,000
The Sustaining Enterprise Fund will be used to support the implementation of a Business Sustainment Project Plan which must be provided by the company outlining the eventual stabilisation of the business and a return to viability.
the funding is open to all Enterprise Ireland, IDA and Údarás na Gaeltachta clients and other companies employing 10 or more in the manufacturing and internationally traded services sector.
the first port of call for liquidity support will continue to be the SBCI/banks.
The Sustaining Enterprise Fund will be a distinct offer of funding support via a repayable advance which would only be provided where all SBCI/bank options have been fully exhausted.
For more information, please visit Enterprise Ireland
COVID19 Business Financial Planning Grant
The COVID19 Business Financial Planning Grant, worth up to €5,000, is a support for all Enterprise Ireland clients.
It is also targeted at those manufacturing or internationally traded services companies that employ 10 or more fulltime employees.
The grant is designed to help companies to develop a Business Sustainment Project plan.
This is a robust financial plan, including the preparation of documentation required to support applications for external finance from banks and/or other finance providers (including Enterprise Ireland).
This grant will enable companies to engage the services of an approved Financial Consultant to develop this plan for use when applying for bank or investor funding and when developing their own mediumterm financial strategy.
Enterprise Ireland will work with these companies on a onetoone basis to support the implementation of the plan.
100% funding of up to €5,000 to access an approved financial consultant help the company to understand its immediate financial position, secure the finance it requires to survive and provide a framework to sustain the business
open to all Enterprise Ireland clients and companies employing 10 or more in the manufacturing and internationally traded sector
For more information, see COVID19 Business Financial Planning Grant
Enterprise Ireland's eiLearn is an online learning resource where you can access over 400 pieces of customised content designed for Irish SMEs.
Local Enterprise Office Support
The Local Enterprise Office network stands ready to assist businesses to address the critical challenges presented by the COVID19 virus pandemic.
Businesses which are seeking support to assist with business continuity and preparedness connected to the COVID19 outbreak, may apply for a COVID19 Business Loan subject to certain conditions and criteria.
This offer is in addition to the current range of business supports for microenterprises.
Local Enterprise Offices can offer supports that can help your business respond.
Trading Online Voucher Scheme
An initiative under the Government’s National Digital Strategy, the expanded Trading Online Voucher Scheme helps small businesses with up to 10 employees to trade more online, boost their sales and reach new markets.
There is up to €2,500 available through the Local enterprise Offices, with cofunding of 50% from the business.
Funding can be used towards adding payment facilities or booking systems to your website or developing new apps for your customers.
The voucher can also be used towards subscriptions to low cost online retail platform solutions to help companies quickly establish a retailing presence online.
Flexibilities to the Trading Online Voucher scheme are now in place allowing businesses apply for a second voucher where they have successfully utilised their first one.
To qualify for the scheme, businesses must have:
limited or no ecommerce presence
no more than 10 employees;
less than €2m in turnover;
be trading for at least 6 months and
be located in the region of the local enterprise office to whom they are applying
For more information, visit your Local Enterprise Office online at LEO
COVID19 Business Loan
The COVID19 Business Loan from Microfinance Ireland (MFI), in partnership with Local Enterprise Offices, is a Government funded initiative to support small businesses through the current period of uncertainty.
It is designed for microenterprises that are:
having difficulty accessing bank finance and
impacted, or may be impacted negatively, by COVID19 resulting in a reduction of 15% or more in turnover or profit
Local Enterprise Office Financial Supports
For existing companies and potential startups that meet eligibility criteria (such as employing 10 or fewer people with the potential for growth and job creation), Local Enterprise Offices can also offer financial supports to help manage current market challenges:
Priming Grants
Business Expansion Grants
Feasibility Study Grants
Technical Assistance for MicroExporters Grant
For more information, visit your Local Enterprise Office online at LEO
LEAN for Micro is available to LEO clients to help build resilience within small companies.
Under this programme, clients can avail of consultancy support with a LEAN Expert (a qualified practitioner), who will work with the company to introduce lean principles, undertake a specific cost savings project and assist the company in benchmarking its performance.
LEAN for Micro can also be used to help implement new remote working and physical distancing guidelines.
For more information, visit your Local Enterprise Office online at LEO
A free of charge service under the Local Enterprise Office Mentor Programme, clients work with an experienced mentor to identify solutions to areas of exposure within their business.
With advice and guidance from their mentor, clients develop strategies that are more robust, which address issues and maximise potential opportunities around COVID19 challenges.
For more information, visit your Local Enterprise Office online at LEO
Training and Webinars
Local Enterprise Offices have moved training programmes, workshops and networking meetups online, covering areas such as:
cash management in a crisis
leading your business through COVID19
advice for employers impacted by the crisis
Most training programmes are free of charge
Other Government Supports in Place
COVID19 Hub
Bord Iascaigh Mhara is providing COVID19 business support to the seafood sector.
Code of Conduct for commercial rents:
A voluntary Code of Conduct between landlords and tenants for commercial rents has been developed based on examples from other jurisdictions and with input from other Departments, State agencies and key stakeholders.
The aim of the Code is to facilitate discussions between landlords and tenants impacted by COVID19.
Commercial Rates:
Commercial Rates Waiver
With limited exceptions, all businesses were granted a ninemonth commercial rates waiver
Further commercial rates relief for affected sectors has been extended to 30 June 2021.
The Companies Registration Office (CRO) has extended current Annual Returns Arrangement for companies.
Crossborder companies:
InterTradeIreland’s Emergency Business Solutions offers professional advice, to the value of €2,250, to address key business challenges related to COVID19.
The EMerge programme provides €2,800 consultancy support to help crossborder businesses develop online sales and eCommerce solutions.
Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth €75 million funding for reopening Early Learning and Childcare Services.
The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has announced a funding package of €75 million for reopening early learning and childcare services.
The grants will help with additional costs associated with reopening after COVID19.
The Design & Craft Council Ireland delivers a range of support and development programmes, including webinars and FAQs in response to COVID19.
Employment Permits:
Employment Permits System Contingency Arrangements
The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (DETE) has implemented a contingency plan to ensure that the Employment Permits system will continue to operate in all scenarios, see COVID 19 Employment Permits System Contingency Arrangements.
The new €55 million Tourism Business Continuity Scheme will support those tourism businesses that were not eligible for the COVID Restrictions Support Scheme (CRSS) payment or previous Fáilte Ireland continuity grant schemes.
In response to the COVID19 crisis and the impact on the tourism sector, the Fáilte Ireland COVID 19 Business Support Hub is targeting its supports to respond to the most urgent challenges and threats tourism businesses are now facing.
The full range of Enterprise Ireland, IDA Ireland, Local Enterprise Office and Údarás na Gaeltachta grant supports will be available to firms to help with strategies to innovate, diversify markets and supply chains and to improve competitiveness.
The National Standards Authority of Ireland (NSAI) has compiled a number of resources in response to COVID19.
To access any or all of the resources below, please visit NSAI updates and resources in response to COVID19.
COVID19 Guide for the Retail Sector
The NSAI has published a COVID19 Retail Protection and Improvement Guide to help retailers manage business continuity during the COVID19 emergency.
It addresses risks to both workers and the public.
Shopping Centre Recovery and Protection Guide
The NSAI has published guidelines for shopping centres restoring business operations following a disruption or closure due to the COVID19 pandemic.
Standards for medical supplies made freely available
The NSAI and SAI Global have developed the COVID19 Response Package which will provide free access to Standards for medical devices and personal protective equipment.
Workplace Protection and Improvement
The NSAI has published a Workplace Protection and Improvement Guide outlining preventative measures businesses can take to prevent the spread of COVID19.
Barrier masks for consumers
NSAI has developed a Specification Written in Fast Track (SWiFT) to address an urgent need for a consensusbased specification for nonmedical and nonPPE masks (barrier masks) for the general public.
Manufacturing and Importing
The NSAI has produced a Quick Guide to manufacturing and importing PPE and Medical Devices to ensure compliance.
Online Collaboration:
Online COVID19 platform to help firms collaborate
Companies aiming to help healthcare responses to the COVID19 crisis can now collaborate via a new online COVID19 platform.
Spearheaded by InterTradeIreland and TechIreland, the crossborder platform allows businesses to see quickly, in and beyond their region, who they can work with to combat the many supply chain and manufacturing challenges generated by the pandemic and meet pressing public needs.
Posters & Signs:
Posters and signs for your premises
The Department of Health has issued a range of COVID19 posters and graphics including new stay safe guidelines for work, home, public transport, outdoors and shopping.
Posters, leaflets and other resources for use in workplaces and communities are also available on the HSE website at COVID19 posters and resources and the HSA website at hsa.ie/covid19.
Restaurants to operate as takeaways
Amendments to Planning and Development Regulations temporarily allow restaurants to operate as takeaways whereby members of the public can order food for collection for consumption offpremises or have food delivered for consumption offpremises without being required to obtain change of use planning permission to operate as takeaways.
Skillnet Ireland:
The ReBound Initiative
The Skillnet Ireland ReBound initiative offers guidance to SME owners and managers on implementing the Return to Work Safely Protocol.
Supply Chain:
Supply Chain Workers
The Department of Transport has prepared COVID19 guidance for supply chain workers.
The guidance document is part of the crossgovernment response to COVID19 and is available to download on gov.ie: COVID19 guidance for supply chain workers.
How business can help with supplies and services to respond to COVID19
From the Office of Government Procurement (OGP) webpage for information on how to supply or donate the goods or services of your business please go to how business can help.
Teagasc is available to provide support on issues facing farm businesses in light of COVID19.
Tourism, arts, culture and sports sectoral guidance:
The COVID19 sectoral guidance from the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media provides targeted information for the sectors it supports.
Reopening Society and Business
This section highlights the 5 Level Framework for Restrictive Measures, the Return to Work Safely Protocol and the Health and Safety Authority COVID19 Template and Checklists.
Resilience and Recovery 20202021: Plan for Living with COVID19
On September 15 2020 the Government published the Resilience and Recovery 20202021: Plan for Living with COVID19.
Ireland is moving from a shortterm emergency response approach to a mediumterm approach to managing risk and repairing the damage that COVID19 has inflicted on society.
The Framework for Restrictive Measures will help us to go about our daily lives as much as possible, while managing the behaviour of the virus.
The Framework consists of 5 Levels.
The lower Levels will be activated when there is low incidence of the disease, with isolated outbreaks, low community transmission.
The higher Levels will be used to deal with higher incidences of the disease.
It will be possible for different regions and counties to be at a different Level to the National Level, depending on the incidence of the virus in that particular region or county.
The 5 Level Framework can be viewed online: Resilience and Recovery 20202021: Plan for Living with COVID19.
The Work Safely Protocol
The Work Safely Protocol is a revision of the Return to Work Safely Protocol published in May 2020.
The revised Protocol incorporates the current advice on the Public Health measures needed to reduce the spread of COVID19 in the community and workplaces as issued by the National Public Health Emergency Team (NPHET), the Department of Health and Government.
The Protocol is a general document applicable to all sectors.
It sets out the minimum measures required in every place of work to prevent the spread of COVID19 and to facilitate the reopening of workplaces following temporary closures and the ongoing safe operation of those workplace.
The HSA (Health and Safety Authority) will be the lead agency in terms of overseeing compliance with the Protocol in the workplace.
If employers or employees need further guidance on the Protocol, the HSA Helpline can be contacted at
The Protocol is available online at Return to Work Safely Protocol
Data Protection: Return to Work Safely Protocol
The Data Protection guidance document has been prepared to assist in providing the necessary clarification to employers (and their representatives) where the measures set out in the Return to Work Safely Protocol may result in the processing of personal data.
The Data Protection protocol is available online at Data Protection Return to Work Safely Protocol
Health and Safety Authority (HSA): COVID19 Templates and Checklists
The HSA checklists and templates have been prepared to help employers, business owners and managers to get their business up and running again and to inform workers about what they need to do to help prevent the spread of Covid19 in the workplace.
They have been drafted based on the Government’s Return to Work Safely Protocol and should be read in conjunction with the Return to Work Safety Protocol.
Employers and workers must work together to keep workplaces safe.
These checklists will help you to do that.
To view or download the templates and checklists, please see HSA: COVID19 Templates and Checklists
HSA Return to Work Safely Online Course
The course has been developed by the HSA to help you to understand the Return to Work Safely (RTWS) Protocol requirements for returning to work.
The Return to Work Safely Induction course will take approximately 20 minutes to complete, and a certificate is available on completion.
The course is available at Return to Work Safely Online Course
Guidance on Working from Home
The Guidance on Working from Home Guide will enable employers and employees to understand the requirements when working from home.
The guide is broken into 12 sections.
To view or download the guide, please visit HSA: Guidance on Working from Home
As the situation around COVID19 continues to develop, so too do the Government supports available.
For uptodate information on the range of Government supports available to address COVID19related challenges, please visit:
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment – COVID19
Call Centre & Helplines
DETE Enterprise Information Centre
The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (DETE) has established an Enterprise Information Centre for information on the government supports available to businesses and enterprises affected by COVID19.
Occupational Health and Safety Helpline
For information on workplace health and safety please contact the Occupational Health and Safety Helpline.
COVID19 related prevention and recovery measures in the workplace
For support in relation to improving your COVID19 related prevention and recovery measures in the workplace, contact the NSAI COVID19 helpline.
For more information, advice and guidelines from across government visit gov.ie/covid19
Resilience and Recovery 20202021: Plan for Living with COVID19
Central Bank COVID19 information hub for consumers and businesses
Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC)
COVID19 Information Hub CCPC
Guidance for Business: COVID19 Face Masks
Department of Social Protection – Pandemic Unemployment Payment
Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) Travel Advice
Department of Health – Updates
EU Export Controls for Personal Protection Equipment
Food Safety Authority of Ireland (FSAI)– COVID19
Government of Ireland – July Jobs Stimulus Package
Health Protection Surveillance Centre (HPSC) – Advice and Guidance
National Standards Authority of Ireland (NSAI)
Barrier Masks for Consumers: Requirements
Local Enterprise Office – COVID19 Pandemic: Business Response
Appendix 1 – COVID19 Business Continuity Checklist
The following is a checklist of some of the key risks to the continuity of your business activities during the outbreak of COVID19 and of preparatory actions that can be taken to respond.
Many of the actions are the same as you would have prepared during any type of similar threat such as preparations for influenza pandemics.
Your organisation should consider appointing a planning coordinator and/or team with defined responsibilities and budget for planning and for preparedness.
A deputy should also be appointed.
If your organisation already has a business continuity planning process, you should consider addressing COVID19 within that process.
In relation to COVID19, it is particularly important that your organisation uses the national resources, posters and guidance that are available and updated on a regular basis to reflect the rapidly emerging situation.
The links to COVID19 resources are available here:
Assign responsibility for planning and preparedness to a senior executive and a deputy
Obtain information on COVID19
Consult within the company, with workers and worker representatives
Consult with suppliers on measures they are taking and on potential disruptions to supply chains
Assess ‘high level’ impact on your business and attach appropriate priority to the planning process
Develop a business continuity plan
Establish authorities, triggers and procedures for implementing plan
Test the plan in exercises
Share best practice with other businesses
Revisit plan periodically
Identify critical activities and the employees and inputs required to maintain them
Consider the possible impact of employee absences
Consider the possible impact of disruption to the supply of inputs from suppliers in Ireland and overseas suppliers
Examine the likely impact of COVID19 on your market and on your customers’ requirements
Identify and agree strategic imperatives
Understand the business need for facetoface meetings should there be community transmission of COVID19 with a risk of person to person spread.
Consider the potential for remote working.
Establish authorities, triggers and procedures for implementing plan.
Consider the issues for business related travel due to COVID19
Consider the financial management implications due to COVID19
Examine the extent to which others will be dependent on your business due to COVID19
Consider the circumstances under which you might decide to scale back or suspend operations due to COVID19
Crosstrain, and identify alternative sources of labour
Communicate with staff in a manner appropriate to the current state of COVID19 phase as guided by national recommendations
Prepare emergency communications plan
Plan for increased takeup of employee welfare services
Prepare policies on sick leave and compassionate leave due to COVID19
Prepare policies on foreign travel during COVID19 event
Plan for the needs of staff overseas
Make arrangements to assure supplies during the COVID19 event
Consider the possibility of changes to your product, your service, or your interaction with customers, due to COVID19, and plan for any changes you consider appropriate
Review insurance coverage
Responding to Workplace Risks due to COVID19
Prepare policies on hygienic behaviour for employees and visitors to premises as guided by national recommendations.
Adhere to respiratory etiquette and hand hygiene policies.
Plan to provide for hand washing, hand hygiene, tissue disposal and other facilities as per national recommendations
Plan for frequent and effective cleaning of the workplace as per national recommendations
Prepare policies as per national recommendations to advise those who are infected, or are suspected to be infected with COVID19
Plan measures to reduce facetoface contact with customers / suppliers and between employees from different sites
Identify work organisation measures that can be taken to reduce potential for employees who are in the workplace to infect each other
Prepare policies on flexible work locations (e.g. teleworking) and flexible working times (e.g. shiftworking)
Provide ICT infrastructure to support teleworking and remote customer interaction
